
January, Friday 1, 1864
'Tis New Year, a happy one to our household. Lieut. Spotswood and Eddie came last night. Poor Eddie is greatly in need of clothes.
I do not think we will have much trouble in out Gen'ling the Yanks. I have $50. G.B. left I intend to devote to that purpose. It is very cold, all nature is robed in Ice.
Notwithstanding the Yanks are such near neighbors, we have had a house full of Rebels all day, four of Henderson's Scouts - Lieut. S. Eddie, Jim & Elb Jeters. Nannie and I went in the buggy over to the smugler's, Joe White, to see if we could not get some things there for Eddie, failed, bro't Lute some soap - almost froze to death - got home at dark, all just finishing dinner, had a splendid time tonight. Our Armys all seem to be Status Quo. God grant successful may be the termination of 1864 - oh! my savior I have buried the past - guide and leade me from temptation. After you, my God, then I live for my Country - God bless our leaders in Dixie.
January, Saturday 2, 1864
Bettie and Uncle Elum went in town this morning horse-back. I sent $50. to Mr. Armstrong to get Eddie's suite of clothes and other articles which he needs. Poor Soldiers, this bitter cold weather I wish I had money to buy every thing they need -
Lieut. Spotswood went with two of Henderson's Scouts over Nonconnah to Mr. Deadrick's to get them to bring him every thing he needs out - they promised to do so. It has been sleeting all day - three of the Bluff City's called this evening, got their dinner, warmed and went on over Nonconnah. Cousin Frazor came this evening, and we have a house full - they are all Rebels, and we always have room for them if a hundred would come. All we can do is to sit round the fire, laugh, talk and try to keep warm. Bettie and Uncle Elum have not returned yet. I feel very uneasy, as she is to smuggle Eddie's clothes. Tate is out of humor, Eddie is troubled, but I think it will all be right - yet suspense is terrible -
January, Sunday 3, 1864
Another day has passed, and not one word from Bettie or Uncle Elum - no communication with Memphis today, too cold to go out side of the doors. Still sleeting - house still full, if not a little fuller. Tate is growing very impatient to leave for Dixie - she is really cross about Bettie, but I still have hope that it will be all right. Eddie feels badly about it, as the risk was run for him - God bless the Rebels. I would risk my life a dozen times a day to serve them - think what they suffer for us -
Henny Furgeson and Lieut. Spotswood left for Dixie. Henny F. bought Helen's pony, gave $200. for it, he rode it off - It does not seem like the Sabbath, though this is the first one of '64. We spent the day as usual, laughing, talking, and trying to keep warm. Julien Simmons and Dashiell Perkins came over from Col. Perkins - Dashiell staid we sat up very late, and Poor old - looks like the noise will run him crazy.
January, Monday 4, 1864
I always try to see the bright side of every picture. I have never given up hope but Bettie would come right side up - and I think she is a star darkie - she and Uncle Elum arrived safely at home. Bettie was loaded with contraband - Eddie a suit of clothes, pr Boots, Gauntlets, socks - blacking, and in fact everything he sent for - he is so grateful and real proud of all his things. Laura gave him the Gauntlets - he went with me to my room, and I packed his valise, he now has everything in the world he needs - and Company to go South with him, Sam Alexander, one of the Bluff City's came and stoped over night to go on in the morning, old Mr. Jaison with him. Dear Eddie, this is his last night with us, we all sat up very late. Weather gloomy, bitter cold, ground still covered with Snow.
January, Tuesday 5, 1864
Still cold, cloudy and gloomy, has not moderated at all, it is real dangerous traveling, the ground covered with Ice.
Eddie has on his new suit, ready to leave for camp. Mr. Alexander and old Mr. Jayson are going with him, and we are better satisfied - I would not have him stay any longer for any thing, I am perfectly disgusted at the way in which our soldiers are lying about, shirking their duty. Eddie has everything to make him comfortable for this winter -
Two more of the Bluff City's arrived, got their dinner, warmed, and went on over Nonconnah. Our house still full, we have a gay time picketing fir the Yankees, but I expect the boys think they have a gayer one running in the cold at their appearance - As usual we all sat up very late.
January, Monday 11, 1864

Like a weary actor in a play,
Like a phantom in a dream,
Like a lost boat left to stray
Rudderless adown the stream -
This is what my life has grown, -
Since thy false heart left me lone, -
And I wonder sometimes when the laugh is loud,
And I wonder at the faces of the crowd,
And the strange fantastic measures that they tread, -
Till I think at last, till I half believe I an dead.

February, Thursday 4, 1864
We had a terrible accident to Night. Jack had Mr. Wilson's Pistol fooling with it, and shot Jane right through the body - poor fellow, he was frightened to death - it was an accident. Mr. Wilson went for the Dr. he came in a great hurry, as it was night he could not tell how serious it is, but very much fears it has struck some vital point.
February, Friday 5, 1864
Jane doing very well, the ball although passing so near the kidneys, & spine, missed both. Dr. Shaw has examined it by daylight, and thinks she will be up again in five or six weeks -
Peter and I went over to Mrs. Duke's - I went to Memphis in Mr. Armstrong's wagon - got the Morphine & Chloroform. Mr. Armstrong drove me out to Mrs. Duke's - I mounted old McGruder, Peter old Sam, we got home early. Jack ran off this morning, we don't know where to - but expect he has gone to Memphis -
February, Sunday 14, 1864
Tate and Helen cam back from Dixie today -
February, Monday 15, 1864
I did not get up very early, was eating breakfast in my room, when I was startled by the reports of six or seven guns - dressed hurriedly, on arriving at the gate found all the family, both white and black, in the greatest state of excitement - one of the 2nd. Mo - Mr. Brent - relating to them the particulars of the skirmish which had taken place only a few hundred yards from our house - A family of negroes had got this far on their journey from Hernando to Memphis when Mr. Brent met them, and they ordered him to surrender, at the same time fireing. Of course no Southern Soldier would ever surrender to a Negro, he fired five times, being all the leads he had - killed one Negro, wounded another, he ran in the woods and we saw nothing more of him - one of the women and a little boy succeeded in getting off also - the other woman with three girls were carried back to Hernando - The Soldier got a splendid Cavalry horse & equipments, two Mules and another horse - he left expecting the Yankees. Father had the Negro burried where he was killed - No Yankees - Mr. Wilson came, no late news -
February, Monday 22, 1864
I mounted Mr. Brent's condemned steed, which proved to be a very nice riding horse, but rather wild - I had a lovely ride, found Mrs. Morgan's after some difficulty. Mrs. Plunket was with Missie, her Mother has been very sick, but they think she is now recovering. I do not think so, she looks dreadfully, and poor Missie, my heart aches to look at her and think what trials she must in my opinion pass through - I staid until 1 o'clock, arrived at home just as they were all eating dinner - found Mr. Wilson had arrived. No news, no courier up lately -
February, Thursday 25, 1864
Sallie Hildebrand sent down for me this morning to go with her to Mrs. Morgan's, poor Ladies, she has at last gone to rest, she died yesterday evening at 4 o'c. I went with her and stayed until sundown, returned home to try to get Joanna to go and sit up, but she would not do it. I went back with Miss Mary Robinson, met Helen and Nannie, got them to go back with us - they had been down to Col. Perkins to spend the day. Ben Henderson went with us, we did not get there until dark.
Poor Missie, I feel so sorry for her.
February, Friday 26, 1864
Nannie, Helen, and Miss Mary Robinson and myself sat up last night with Mrs. Morgan's corps - It was a sad and lonely night - Poor Missie, how my heart sympathizes with her in this great affliction. Helen and Nannie came home very early, Miss Robinson and I staid until after breakfast, when Miss Huckens came we left. Tate & Joanna went to the funeral, after that Joanna and Cousin S. returned Memphis -
A squad of 7 Confederates stoped at the gate - belonging to 2nd. Ark -
I went to sleep directly after breakfast, and did not awaken until after dinner. I was never in such a cross humor as I have been tonight. I feel ashamed for the way in which I have spoken to Bettie and Laura - nobody knows what I have to try me sometimes. Bettie left early, Laura fast asleep - Beulah & Tippie Dora both nodding - here I sit at 3 o'clock morning, with four packages of 300 letters for our Rebel Soldiers, which it has taken me until this time of night to finish. I will lie down and take a nap - I had to wake Laura to get me fresh water, I was so sick. She is always kind to me.
February, Saturday 27, 1864
Annie Nelson and myself went to Memphis this morning - very warm, dusty and disagreeable. Accomplished all I went for - did not go near any of the Officials, was fortunate to meet a kind friend, Lucie Harris, who gave me her pass - 'tis a risk, yet we can accomplish nothing without great risk at times, I returned the favor by bringing a letter to forward to her husband, Army of Mobile. I sat up until 8 o'clock last night, arranging poor Green's mail to forward to the different command. It was a difficult job, yet a great pleasure to know I had it in my power to rejoice the hearts of our brave Southern Soldiers - most were Kentucky letters for Breckenridge's command - the rest were Mo. letters for Johnston's, Polk's, and Maury's commands. God grant them a safe and speedy trip.
We have glorious news from Dixie - Forrest has completely routed Smith and Grierson at Okolona - God grant my Bro Eddie may be safe - we hear his Col. Jeff Forrest was killed. The Yanks are perfectly demoralized, all that escaped have arrived in Memphis. I never witnessed such a sight as the stolen negroes, poor deluded wretches - Praise God for this Victory.
February, Sunday 28, 1864
Cloudy and raining all day, much colder than yesterday. Anna Nelson and myself went to Mrs. Morgan's - I went to take those letters to Cousin Cambell Edmondson, he left for Dixie, and will see that they are safely forwarded. Met a great many persons there, all in fine spirits, topic of conversation our glorious Victory, which was added to this morning by news that Sherman was in full retreat for Vicksburgh - had not reached Canton, and we were confident of ruining the whole army as Lee with his Cavalry force was between him and Vicksburgh - Spare so much bloodshed of the bravest and best of our Sunny South - Enlighten the minds of the miserable Yankees, of their sinfullness - drive them from our south! Oh, just and merciful Savior, give us peace, and our independence -
I received a letter from Dr. Moses and Maj. Price by Mrs. Facklin, through them heard from my friend Maj. Maclean, with Gen. Price.
Laura and I sat up late tonight, I slept all evening. Still raining - 12 o'clock sleeting, very cold -
February, Monday 29, 1864
The last day of Winter - Gloomy, oh, mercy how dreary, sleeting all day, the shrubery is all bowed to the earth with the weight of Ice - all nature is crowned with it, yet it is so gloomy out. There is some happiness in our household, the two children Mamie and Robert are all life, though like all children, troublesome and noisy from their imprisonment. Father and Cousin Frazor have spent the day reading in the Parlor, while we have, as women generally are, buisy sewing. I fixed Laura's new dress waiste. The Servants have done little except to try to keep warm and keep fires in the house. We have seen no one today, therefore have heard nothing later from our glorious Victory. God bless our noble soldiers, and protect them from this miserable bad weather -
Tate and Cousin Sallie both very much disapointed not being able to go to Memphis. Laura and I as usual sat up late. I drew the pattern on my swiss to braide, she ruffling her Apron - I finished the book of Luke.
March, Tuesday 1, 1864
First day of Spring - Laura awakened me for my breakfast. I looked out of the window and to my surprise, one of the hardest Snow Storms I ever saw was prevailing - lasted until 11 o'clock, when the sun shone out brightly. A more magnificent scene I never witnessed, the forests glistened like thousands of diamonds, sun set was glorious. It moderated a great deal, until night when the freeze came again. Laura and I spent the evening alone, except Beulah and Tippie Dora - buisy sewing. Laura just finished her ruffled apron - I am really proud of her, she sews so nicely. I spent the day in Tate's room, braided one width on my white swiss - if my chest was only stronger, I would enjoy sewing, but oh! I am so weary - both in body and spirit. My angel Mother, you would not have thought your two youngest born could grow so indiferent. I pine for a companion, tis not my fault, she loves me not. My poor old Father, you are all that binds me here. Helen is to be married, they are all buisy, but do not wish me to share it - have seen no one, or heard nothing more from Dixie -
March, Wednesday 2, 1864
Bright and beautiful - Ice glittering magnificently - moderating a great deal, by 12 o'clock all snow gone, real pleasant tonight. Father went to Mr. Holmes', our victory confirmed by news from below. Mr. Wilson dined with us, gave the same news Father heard at Mr. H's. Nonconnah out of it's banks, still raining. Tate and Cousin S. very much dissipointed, as they seem in great haste to go to the City. I sat in Parlor after Mr. Wilson came, braided another width on my swiss, tis real fascinating work, but oh! my chest aches so badly, no one but my sainted Mother ever knew or sympathized with me in this affliction. Laura washed today, although my only companion she has fallen into the arms of Morpheus, and left me real lonely, she and Bettie are improving very much in their lessons. Poor Father, he too is alone. I have forgiven the past, heavenly Father, give me strength to forget it. Nothing late from Jimmie or Eddie - Lord be with them in all hours of danger, and bring them safe to us.
March, Thursday 3, 1864
The monotony of our life was somewhat changed today, by a visit from Lt. Bayard of the 4th U. S. R. to Nannie, he is her cousin, and came this distance with only six scouts to make a call, they behaved themselves very well, ate dinner with us - and they all admit our dear Rebel Gen. Forrest defeated them badly in their raid to Okolona. Decatur Doyle came this evening from Dixie - Jimmie sailed for Europe the 6th. of Feb. Eddie and all the boys safe through the fight. Pontotoc suffered very much - Sister Mary with the two youngest children will start home some time next month. Col. Jeff Forrest is really killed - Sherman has returned to Vicksburgh. Our Army of Johnston advancing - Grant reported falling back.
I have been buisy braiding all day, one more width finished - Laura has provoked me and I feel real cross - she or I one should certainly have less temper at times. All of them received letters tonight except me, tis now 10 o'c, and I think I will try and get to sleep early tonight. I suppose they are all happy in the house, O can never content myself with the lonely life I lead.
March, Friday 4, 1864
I do wish Nonconnah would fall, and let a visitor from Memphis return home, for I am always in an ill humor when she is about. Tate and Helen went over to see Missie Morgan this evening. I have been in Tate's room all day buisy sewing - almost finished my dress -
Mr. Hildebrand was here today, bro't noting later from Dixie - nor have we heard anything today. I wish one of the scouts would come, and bring us some news. It has been very cloudy and disagreeable all day, this evening we had quite a storm. I received today another batch of letters from Dixie, to be mailed in Memphis for Yankee land. Decatur told us Gen. Armstrong had been ordered to Miss. he has taken Mariah to Mobile to be confined, poor girl I pity her, no Mother or relation to be with her. Laura as usual nodding, and I feel all alone. Beulah and Tippie Dora also enjoying their nap. I feel real sick tonight - oh! I am so lonely - what is to be my fate - oh! God shield me, have I not suffered enough - make my future bright.
March, Saturday 5, 1864
Nonconnah has fallen at last, and crowds of waggons are passing, loaded with provisions, in exchange for their cotton. Joanna and Cousin S. went to town this morning. Mr. Wilson came early and staid until after dinner with us. Tate, Helen, Nannie & Decatur all spent the day sewing in my room, Decatur excepted of course from the sewing - we had a pleasant time. Only this morning I did wish I was a man. I never read a more insulting note in my life than Father received from Dr. Malone. I will not stain the page of my book writing of such a dog, and hope God will give me strength to forgive it -
Cold Water and all streams below so high that we have no communication with Dixie - therefore have heard no news today. I would give anything if I could send the things I have for the poor soldiers - poor fellows, I know they need them - would to heaven I had money to get all I could bring through the lines. I finished my dress today, and made Laura a beautiful apron. 12 o'c, no Beulah yet. Laura, Tippie Dora & I alone, they asleep.
March, Sunday 6, 1864
A bright and beautiful day. Tate and Nannie went to Church. Col. Perkins came home with them to take Nannie home with him. Prior leaves for the Army in the morning, was anxious to see Nannie before he left. Tate saw Cousin Cambell, just arrived from Dixie, no news - waters up - Telegraph all destroyed - floating rumors that Sherman had arrived safely in Vicksburgh, Forrest moving this way - that is glorious news for us. Cousin Mat, Frazor and Joanna came from Memphis about 10 o'c. Mary was delighted with the arrival of Frazor. Joanna went to the Provost Marshall yesterday to get her a pass, and he started to arrest her, thought it was me. I heard some good news, she heard one of the 4th. U. S. R. swear he would shoot old Gibbert, the dutch detective.
I have not received a letter for over two weeks, and expect old Williams has intercepted them in the Post Office - oh! God, how long, how long must we suffer -
Beulah has run off again tonight. Laura, Tip and I alone. Laura and Bettie said a good lesson - we all sat in the Parlour after Tea. One month today since Jimmie left for Europe.
March, Monday 7, 1864
The quiet of our life was disturbed today by the arrival of 150 Yankees - only two came to the house. We gave them their dinner. Mr. Wilson and Decatur were down in the Orchard. Helen sent for them to come and capture the Yanks, we saw the rest coming, & Tate and I ran to tell them it was too great a risk. Mr. W. and D. were nearly to the gate, I was never so excited - we turned them in time, the two Yanks passed while we were standing there. Mr. W. and D. came to the house and spent some time with us, when Mr. W. followed the Yankees. They returned about 9 o'c on their way to Memphis. D. and Cousin F. had a run again, with the horses, but fortunately none of them came in.
I have not done any work today, have suffered death with my spine. Tate and Helen at work in my room all day - I sat in Tate's room until bed time. Beulah, Laura, and Tip all in time - I amused myself reading Artemus Wards book.
We did not hear what the Yanks went for, we heard from Eddie and the boys, all safe. One of Henderson's scouts arrived.
March, Tuesday 8, 1864
Cousin Mat, Frazor and Joanna went in town this morning. Joanna was to have returned this evening, did not come. We heard what the Yanks were after - old Frank the detective carried them to Felix Davis's and took him and his wife both to Memphis, they are now in the Irving Block, we did not hear the offence, only 'twas some old grudge he had against Mr. Davis. They stole a good deal from Widow Hildebrand's but she has taken the oath, and I don't care much. I pity poor Mr. & Mrs. Davis, they have been so kind to our Soldiers.
Nannie Perkins came home this morning. Joe Clayton - Memphis Light Dragoons - came on short furlough. Tate & I are going after Mrs. Clayton & Hal tomorrow. We all spent the evening in the Parlor, singing and playing. I am almost crazy with my spine, took a dose of Morphine, I am in so much pain it does not affect me - All spent day in my room sewing - Laura and Beulah in, Tip not arrived. Oh! I am so lonely, and suffering so much.
March, Wednesday 9, 1864
Tate and I went over to Mrs. Clayton early this morning - had to pass through the Yankee Camp, no trouble, spent the day and came back this evening. Hal and Dink came with us - Tate's horse threw her, not hurt, I was never so full of laugh - reached home about dark. After Tea we were all sitting in the Parlor when in walked Joe Clayton and Mr. McCorkle, our little St. Louis friend, he has a furlough, and is going to St. Louis and New York to see his Father and Sister - we were all delighted to see him. All sat in the Parlor until 11 o'clock, singing, playing and had a real nice time. Laura and I were not so lonely. Hal shared my little room - I heard of my letters in town, but could not get any one to bring them to me. Mr. Wilson took one of those Yankees prisoner the other evening, and got him a fine Saddle and Bridle, so he has made up for his loss at the Party. Oh! I am suffering so much with my spine, what is to become of me -
Mrs. Dupre arrived from Dixie, sent Helen two letters by me. I was so much disappointed that I did not get one. I expect my friends will all forget me now that I cannot run to Memphis and bring what they want.
March, Thursday 10, 1864
Mr. McCorkle and Tate went to Memphis this morning. I hope he may have a safe and pleasant trip. Cousin Frazor left for Dixie this morning.
We were delighted to see Mr. Wilson and Harbert this evening, they staid with us until after Tea, bro't a letter from Eddie and Bro. George. Tate was kind enough ti bring my letters from Memphis, one from Miss Em, two were for Surg Lenord from Mo to my care. Our house is crowded tonight. Mrs. Clayton and Hal share my room. I sat up very late, wrote to Maj. Price & Dr. Moses. No Yanks near today. I have suffered, no one can tell how much, with my spine. Mr. Bob Wallace and friend came to spend the night with us. I am so lonely and my spine hurts me so much I can't sew, and it is impossible to fix my mind on any reading for ten minutes, in the excitement we live in. I am unhappy and I tremble for fear there is something more fatal to befall me, as the Spine so much influences the brain.
Beulah and Tip and Laura all here, sat up until 12 o'clock.
March, Friday 11, 1864
Mrs. Clayton, Hal and Dink all went home this morning - Mr. Wallace & friend left. Decatur Doyle and Joe Clayton both left for Dixie - they both got all they came for. It has seemed quite lonely all day. I have been compelled to lie down most of the day with my spine, it is getting worse all the time. Tate & Helen sat in my room all day sewing. I am happy that poor Father can have some quiet now. I sat in the Parlor a little while after Tea - have spent the evening in my own lonely little room. Laura and Bettie said a good lesson - I tried to keep Laura awake, but she noded so, it worried me, and I sent her to bed. Tip is also asleep, and Beulah has not yet made her appearance. I wrote to Miss Em tonight, tis half past twelve - and I feel afraid. Joanna would not let me have the key to lock my door, two robbers were killed near here yesterday, the Country is full of them - oh! God protect me. One year ago Mrs. Bredell & I arrived in Granada - Wednesday.
March, Saturday 12, 1864
Tate and Bettie went to Memphis this morning, did not succeed in getting anything through the lines, the Picket was very insulting to her. She brought me a letter, but not for myself, only my care, to Mr. Lawson in Henderson's scouts. I forwarded it to Capt. H. also a package of late papers, by Mr. Harbut, who spent the evening with us. We all sat in the Parlor, and have had a pleasant evening. Mr. Harbut vacxinated Father, Helen, Nannie and I , also Jane and Laura. I have made the skirt to my swiss Mull, and fixed me a beautiful braid pattern, and drew on the skirt ready for my work on Monday morning. I have not suffered much with my spine today, though only on account of taking Morphine last night, which has made me insensible to the pain. 11 o'clock, so I will to bed - no Beulah. Father gave me a key today. Tippie Dora & Laura both here.
March, Sunday 13, 1864

Hopes, what are they? Beads of morning
Strung on Slender blades of Grass,
Sweet is hope's wild warbled air
But oh! - it's echo is despair!

Today is the first anniversary of the happiest day in my life - just one short year ago, twas then on Friday morning, he came for me to walk on the hill to listen to the echoes of our triumph at Fort Pemberton (Greenwood) - I rushed on to meet my fate, oh! God that it had never overtaken me - yet tis the brightest spot in my sad life - his love - in reviewing my diary for '63 I find in this day a quotation from Raphael which has indeed found its moral. Oh! who in the course of his life has not felt some joy without a security, and without the certainty of a morrow. Time hath power over hours, none over the soul. Time had power over his heart, yet none over my true and holy love. Today he wooes the daughter of a more sunny clime - Miss Sallie Anderson of Mobile, may she never know the pangs of a deceived heart - I have spent the day alone in my little room, finished the book of John - bright and beautiful, though rather cool. Laura and Bettie went to Mrs. Wilson's, all the whole family walking and enjoying themselves - tis just four o'clock - I will wait until after Tea to finish. I sat in the Parlor with the Father after Tea. Laura and Bettie speeled at Baker tonight - No Beulah or Tip - Laura & I alone. Oh! my heavenly Father humble my heart, and give me Christian patience.
March, Monday 14, 1864
I have had a miserable cold, and not fit for society - yet we have been delighted by the visit of a Rebel Major, Maj. Allen, who spent the day with us. I tried to braid on my dress, only a little while, my spine pained me teribly. Maj. A. went down to Col. Perkins to stay until Thursday, when I will have returned from Memphis - having attended to his wants. Mr. Wilson and Harbut came this evening. Mr. Harbut has brought him a new horse very pretty one. Poor Anna, I think Mr. Wilson ought to give her rest - they staid right late, we had a pleasant evening - music, conversation, &c. Anna Nelson and I have made our arrangements to go into Memphis tomorrow and not return till next day. Oh! Lord, deliver me from getting in any trouble with the Yanks, this will be a hard trip, I have a great risk to run. No Beulah tonight, I think she has forsaken her post. Laura and Tip both here nodding. I feel like I had been stewed - oh! God, protect, guide and make me a good girl.
March, Tuesday 15, 1864
Anna Nelson and I started to Memphis about 9 o'clock, suffered very much with the cold, stoped at Mr. Roberts to warm - from there we passed through the Pickets to the Pigeon Rooste Road - found Mr. Harbut's after much searching - did not reach Memphis until 10 o'clock, left out horse & buggy at Mr. Barbier's, went up town - and not one thing would the Merchants sell us. because we did not live in their lines. I consoled myself with a wheel that could not turn - could not spin - went to see my friend Mrs. Facklen, she went up town and bought the things for me - poor deluded fools, I would like to see them thwart a Southerner in such an undertaking as I had. Spent a very pleasant evening with Mrs. Facklen's family - all rebels, and we talked just as we please! -
Mrs. F. and I did not go to sleep until 2 o'c, this being the first time I had seen her since she returned from Dixie. I have finished all my provisions, and will have nothing to do tomorrow except fixing my things for smuggling.
March, Wednesday 16, 1864
Went up Street directly after Breakfast to finish a little job I forgot on yesterday. At one o'clock Mrs. Facklen, Mrs. Kirk and I began to fix my articles for smugling, we made a balmoral of the Grey cloth for uniform, pin'd the Hats to the inside of my hoops - tied the boots with a strong list, letting them fall directly in front, the cloth having monopolized the back & the Hats the side - All my letters, brass buttons, money, &c in my bosom - left at 2 o'clock to meet Anna at Mr. Barbie's - started to walk, impossible that - hailed a hack - rather suspicious of it, afraid of small-pox, weight of contrabands ruled - jumped in, with orders for a hurried drive to Cor Main & Vance - arrived, found Anna not ready, had to wait for her until 5 o'clock, very impatient - started at last - arrived at Pickets, no trouble at all, although I suffered horribly in anticipation of trouble. Arrived at home at dusk, found Mr. Wilson & Harbut, gave them late papers and all news. Mrs. Harbut here to meet her Bro. bro't Mr. Wilson a letter from Home in Ky. Worn out. 8 yds. Long cloth, 2 Hats, 1 pr Boots, 1 doz. Buttons, letters, &c. 2 Cords, 8 tassels.
Laura, Beulah & Tippie Dora, all in.
March, Thursday 17, 1864
My cold is no better - miserably hoarse, got up rather late. Laura brought my breakfast to my room, fixed my work to go in the Parlor - found Mr. Wilson & Mr. Harbut arrived - All buisy sewing, laughing & talking, - when the Yankees were reported coming, Mr. W. & H in the greatest haste retreated through the Garden, left their horses - the report was a mistake, it being Maj. Phil Allin - All quiet again, enjoying ourselves very much. Maj. Allin liked his Hats very much. Mr. Harbut, Sr. & Mr. Redford came - after a little Mr. Falls and Miss McKinney, they brought the rest of Maj. Allin's clothes. Mr. Wilson left early to start a currier below - the rest remained until after dinner then returned to Memphis. Mr. Harbut & Maj. Allin staid late, left together, oh! how I hate to see the last Grey Coat disappear. Father and I sat alone in the Parlor after Tea.
Laura, Beulah & Tip all in tonight, all asleep except I. I shall read myself into the arms of Morpheus - When, oh! when will it be bright, my Savior I trust in thee, hope & faith oh! God give me strength -
March, Friday 18, 1864
One of the loveliest days I ever spent, bright and beautiful. I have been very buisy braiding my dress. finished 1 1/2 yd. it is very fascinating work, and with my natural abhorance of sewing I think this particular kind would give me much pleasure, if it were not for my miserable old spine. I am suffering intensely tonight from my hard days work. I fixed Mr. Noe's grave this evening, it is a lovely spot but oh! so sad, my heart aches when I think of his long suffering, and so young, taken from his poor widowed Mother. Oh! God drive those miserable wretches from our Sunny land, and give us freedom and peace. I have been alone today except Laura sewing. Tate came twice to sew on the machine - Joanna & Anna Wilson went to town this morning, got back safe, no late news. Mr. Wallace, Henry Wilson & friend were here to Tea. I came to my room very early - heard Bettie's & Laura's lessons. Beulah and Tippie Dora both here - read myself to sleep -
March, Saturday 19, 1864
Today has been just as gloomy as yesterday was bright - cold, windy & cloudy. Helen & Nannie had a general cleaning up in the house. Laura was unusually particular about my room, kept me waiting until dinner time to get to my sewing. I made up for lost time, finished one width of braiding, and drew the rest of the pattern off. I don't know what I shall do, if I am to spend so much of my time alone - no companion except my sewing, which is almost too much food for a mind in the present state of my own - however, tis all for the best, God's will, not mine be done.
Tate & Anna Nelson went to town this morning, got back safe. Mr. Eyrich sent me a nice lot of papers, Tate brought me a letter, as usual not my own, from Capt. Hoenstein to his wife in Mobile. No late news.
Laura & Bettie recited a very good lesson tonight - everything in my room statu quo. Anna Wilson did not come, went with Helen & Nannie upstairs.
March, Sunday 20, 1864
Another Sabath passed, and I read only eight Chapters in my Bible - first of the Acts - I did not get up until rather late. Laura brought me a nice, warm breakfast to my room. I don't know what I should do if it were not for her. A disagreeable day, cloudy, gloomy and real cold. I spent the morning alone in the Parlor reading. Mr. Wilson & Mr. Harbut arrived about 12 o'clock. No news, except that which we regreted very much. Gen. Chalmers relieved of his command, ordered to report to Gen. Polk, Misouri. McCulock takes his place - Forrest is on the wing again, no one knows where to - God bless Eddie and keep him safe, wherever they may go.
Tate, Nannie, Helen & Mollie Strange all went to Church - got back late of course, were delighted to see our Scouts. Mr. Wilson is going to Camp tomorrow, I am so sorry. I had a nice bundle of papers to send Capt. Henderson, one also to Dr. Moses. Oh! if I was only sleepy, and nothing to read - what shall I do - Laura, Beulah & Tip all asleep.
March, Monday 21, 1864
Wake'd up almost sufocating with the Smoke - wind from the East. Laura had to throw all the fire out of the stove. Began my work early, nothing to disturb me all day - finished two widths on my dress in braiding. Sat in the Parlor, no companion. Father came in once or twice, sat in his easy chair and read. Laura & I sat an old Goose this evening, and I think she acted her name to perfection about the nest we fixed for her - how cold today, it is real winterish. I am afraid we will not have much fruit this year. I sat in the Parlor a little while after Tea - Father was reading, so I thought my own little room much more agreeable, as the rest all went in Tate's room.
Beulah has run off again tonight, and I expect will certainly get herself in trouble. Bettie and Laura in the same old style with their spelling lesson - all over, and here I sit alone, rocking, rocking, rocking - with the few embers in the grate my only reflection to the thousand thoughts which crowd my poor, clouded mind - oh! for sleep, deep sleep to relieve me.
March, Tuesday 22, 1864
Sunshine has greeted us once more - it has been a lovely day. Nannie & Annie Nelson went to town this morning, got back safe. No news - Mr. Eyrich sent me the late papers - I sent them on to Capt. Henderson by Mr. Harbut, he spent the day with us - his Bro & Mr. Redford came down to meet him, brought him a fine horse. We all spent the day in the Parlor. I finished braiding my dress - just as we had finished Tea, and were quietly chatting in the Parlor, - Peter ran hurriedly in and announced Jim Titus and Mr. Jack Doyle - of course we were all astonished, imagined Forrest near, and many other such ideas, ran out to meet them, instead of Mr. Doyle met old Boss Pugh, we were delighted to see them, but sorry to hear Forrest had passed us and gone to Jackson, Tenn. Jim & Mr. Pugh have only a short leave to see us, and then return to Columbus, where part of the command are. Eddie went with Forrest, I expect we will hear glorious news from him in a few days - God grant successful may be his career. Sat up rather late - as usual, my little family all right.
March, Wednesday 23, 1864
Tate & I went to Memphis this morning bright and early - stoped at Mrs. Apperson's first - from there to Cousin Frazor. Tate met me at Mrs. Worsham's room, we then went up street, walked until three o'clock, attended to all affaires entrusted to our care, ready to leave at half past three - all of the Yankee Cavalry moveing, destination not known - could hear no particulars, think they are going after Forrest, who we think is on his way to Kentucky. The Yankees are evidently on a great fright about something. God grant they may be defeated in all their undertakings. We came through white Pickets - I think we will not try them again - the Negroes are ten times more lenient - We came by Wash Taylor's, got two hats for soldiers - came through Yankee Camp, if the Lord forgives me I will never do it again. Yankee Soldier drove our horse in Nonconnah for us - seemed to be a gentleman, for which we were very grateful - found Mr. Harbut awaiting our report. Mr. John & Henry Nelson & Mr. Harbut took Tea with us. Jim & Mr. Pugh completed the list for a nice Rebel meeting - brought a great deal through lines this eve - Yankee Pickets took our papers -
March, Thursday 24, 1864
I slept very late this morning - had breakfast in my room - I would rather have slept than have the choicest dishes from old Schwab's. Ready at last, arrived in the Parlor, found Jim & Mr. Pugh with the girls having a nice time - spent the morning fixing my old Bombazine dress. Enjoyed my dinner finely, did not stay in the Parlor very long after dinner, came to my room and prepared for a nice evening siesta with London Papers for my companion - soon fell into the arms of Morpheus, slept soundly, but have had no spirit since awakening. Joanna got back from Memphis, bringing Mammy to see Prince. Anna Nelson will ride her Boo, a horse, through the lines tomorrow. Mr. Harbut came early this eve, I left them all in the Parlor - Father allows them to sit up late, as he is reading the papers - I got tired and came to my room, but found it very cheerless, no fire, smoking. Laura, Beulah & Tip all asleep - oh! I am so lonely - I feel a presentiment something good is going to turn up for the Confederacy - God bless my dear Bros, and bring them safe home again.
March, Friday 25, 1864
As usual late, and breakfast in my room, found Nannie, Jim & Mr. Pugh having a nice time in the Parlor - have not done any work scarcely, only hem'd Eddie two handkerchiefs - Mr. Pugh and I had a game of drafts - I beat him the best three in five. Helen & Joanna went over to Mr. Armstrong's, did not hear any late news, Mr. Harbut came this evening, he had no news, no curior up for several days - heard from Mr. McMahon, in 2d. Mo Cav, he is very sick, and can't tell when he will come for his cloth and boots. Mr. Matthews, a soldier from Jackson Cavalry is staying with us tonight, Mr. Harbut stayed too, and we have spent a very pleasant evening. Jim & Boss Pugh the life of the party. Father was very lenient with us tonight, let us sit up until 11 o'clock - we Rebels are having a gay time, although the Yankee Camp is only three miles off. God bless our servants, for they are certainly very faithful. Laura is sitting in a chair now, fast asleep - Bettie did not wait to say her lesson. Beulah and Tippie Dora both sleep - here I sit, solitary and alone - my mind giving birth to a thousand thoughts yet none mature. God bless my Brothers, and oh! make me a better and more useful woman -
March, Saturday 26, 1864
Today everything in commotion, as it is a general cleaning up day. Laura did not give me possession of my room until 12 o'clock - have not set a stitch in sewing today. Mr. Pugh and I spent the morning playing Drafts - I beat him badly. After dinner he very kindly offered to fix my lock, so he & I with Gimlet and other instruments proceed to my little domicile to accomplish the task. I think I shall recommend him as a No 1 Carpenter - although he filled my eyes with sawdust - he fixed it very securely and nice - and I shall always think of and bless him, at the still hour of night, when thoughts and fears of a raide from the Yankees or Robbers are soothed only with it's security, as my faithful slave Laura, my dog Beulah, & kitty Tippie Dora, are always securely in the arms of Morpheus. I feel so much better about our affairs, I think the bright day is fast approaching. Tate & Anna Nelson got safe from Memphis - Anna got her Bro's horse through the lines - We have glorious news from Forrest, tomorrow I will give full particulars. God bless my Bro who is with him.
March, Sunday 27, 1864
Rather lazy, as it was Sunday - Laura fixed me a very nice breakfast which I enjoyed in my room. Helen & Nannie went home with Anna Nelson, all rode horseback, the girls did not stay very long. I spent the morning reading my Bible, finished the Acts today - took a long walk after dinner, with Beulah as a companion - she enjoyed it very much, especially the creek. Tate & Helen went to ride over on the Plank Road this evening, they did not hear any news - Mr. Harbut came this evening, brought me a package of letters from Capt. Henderson, to be mailed in Memphis, also a note for myself from the Capt, with it a Dixie newspaper, which I shall carry to Mr. Eyrich. I sent Capt. H. a package of Yankee papers in return. Forrest captured Union City Thursday, taking 800 prisoners. God grant he may be successful in all his attempts to gain our lost teritory. The Yanks as yet have not started after him, oh! heaven keep my Bro safe - All my little household asleep, and I am lonely, oh! so lonely. Staid in Parlor until 10 o'c, Father made us all retire - Mr. Harbut, Mr. Pugh & Jim he took with him -
March, Monday 28, 1864
Tate and Anna Nelson went to Memphis this morning - got back safe Mr. Tommerry gave Tate up all of her things the U. S. G. confiscated, she brought them all safe through the lines, they belong to Mr. Wallace, who will be delighted to hear they are recovered. Mr. Harbut & Jim went off scouting, did not return until late this evening. We have had glorious news today - Mo. McCulloch captured Germantown, & still moving forward. Forrest is having glorious victory in Kentucky - Hickman & Paducah, both held by our forces - the Yanks are shelling Paducah. We are not afraid of Gun Boats - Father of justice and mercy, crown our armies with victory, drive the wicked tyrants from our Sunny land - we humbly crave thy pardon & blessing - oh! give us peace - guide my Bros, protect them from harm.
I made my white swiss skirt, played drafts with Mr. Pugh, he beat me badly - trimed the Rose trees - have spent a very pleasant day - and am so happy tonight after the good news - God bless our dear Soldiers and Officers.
I worship Jeff Davis and every Rebel in Dixie -
March, Tuesday 29. 1864
A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken - Proverbs -
I am sitting in my little room alone, with the exception of my little family, who are more inclined to the silent embrace of Morpheus than any pleasures the quiet of my own society could give. Father was tired, went to his room early, gave us permission to sit up until 11 o'clock. I availed myself of it for a short time - finally withdrew to a more quiet scene, leaving Mr. Harbut, Mr. Pugh and Jim together with the girls, haveing a gay time. I have spent the day, how? I think it is how, Mr. Pugh & I played drafts most of the time, he beat me badly. I wonder in after years if I can recall this day, and imagine the same feeling of je ne sais quoi which I have experienced, there is a bright day fast approaching, I can't say why, but I feel it - oh! my beautiful savior, only teach my heart to be pure and good, let no unholy thought or action lead me astray oh! keep me near thee, let thy influence and protection guide me from wickedness, in the paths of righteousness - hasten the day I am to be free from this melancholy - then I will prove my punishment has been great enough, and through my afflictions I am a child of God - oh! give me thy love, make me a christian. God bless my Brothers, and my dear old Father -
March, Wednesday 30, 1864
It seems I can never go to Memphis without some disagreeable arrangements and sayings. I was greatly disappointed in my trip. Tate and I went together. I stoped at Mrs. Facklen's on Union St. - she went on up to Cousin Frazor's in the buggy - Mrs. Facklen and Mrs. Kirk in great distress, old Hurbbut gave her ten days to abandon her house, she took and old Yankee Officer, his Wife & two children to board with her, hoping he would recall the heartless order to make her and her little children homeless. I did not smuggle a thing through the lines, except some letters. Mr. Tommery gave me a permit to bring 2 Gals Whiskey and 5 bbs Tobacco - which I got home safely. Frazor came out in the buggy with me, Cousin Mat and Tate came together, we did not have any trouble at all - they all sat up very late in the Parlor, I came to my room early. Jim and Mr. Pugh came with me to try my whiskey - which they pronounced very good.
I received a letter from Mrs. Moses today - and am really distressed she did not receive the last I forwarded to her. Forrest is having his own way in Kentucky - God grant Eddie may be safe.
March, Thursday 31, 1864
Laura awakened me standing by the bed with my breakfast. I was too sleepy to eat, and only drank my Coffee. I have felt very badly all day, did not do any sewing, lying down most of the day. Mr. Pugh, Jim and Mr. Harbut with Jim's body guard the Prince of darkness, left for Dixie. Mr. Harbut is to meet the other Scouts a few miles below here, where they will all cross the R. R. together, joining Capt. Henderson somewhere in Tenn - all of troops have crossed Charlston R. R. and I expect we will hear glorious news in the nest few days. Jim & Mr. Pugh are trying to find a way to join Forrest, they had not been gone more than five minutes when four Yankees, belonging to 6th, Ill. Cav. came riding in, asked if we had seen any Confederate Soldiers, of course we said no. I think they came to steal, but we were polite to them, and they left - only wanted some milk, which they got. Tate & Nannie went to town today, Mr. Perryman got them a pass - they got home safe, but saw Anna Nelson and Sallie Hildebrand arrested and carried back with a Negro guard, for smugling a pr of boots -
Forrest is still moveing onward through Ky, having everything his own way. I came to my room early. A terible rainstorm raging - my pets all in. May my heart still be humble, and trust that God will, in his own time, brighten my life and happines -
April, Friday 1, 1864
A gloomy day, raining, cold, and dreary. I have managed to exist, have not done much sewing. I came to my room after dinner, and spent the evening reading the Caxton's - although quite an old book, I have never read it. I began with high expectations, and recommendations, as Bulwer's best - must confess I was greatly disapointed. I think ‘What will he do with it ?’ is one of the best novels I ever read - with that as my last remembrance of Bulwer, it would scarce be expected I could admire old Mr. Caxton's eccentric disposition, or Ladie Caxton's great lack of spirit, through fear of her liege lord - Beulah was my companion - I could not listen to her distressed whine, unfastened her chain, she went out as I came to my room after tea, and has not yet returned. I fear they will all get into trouble, poor Beulah, she is my best friend, but I do not think she has many friends outside of my own little room. Laura and Bettie said a very good lesson - Laura and Tippie Dora both asleep. No late news from Forrest. I am so lonely, how long oh! Lord, how long must I wait -
April, Saturday 2, 1864
Ever memorable and (to me ) sad day. I was awakened this morning by the pitious howl of poor Fosco - as I feared when Beulah left the room, they all killed seven sheep last night. Uncle Elum knocked Fosco in the head, Beulah ran to my room, thereby saving her life - Father sent for her, and then came for her - but oh! he knew not what he asked - to give my dog - my best friend - my Beulah, who had so often defended me in danger, my only protector in the dead hour of night - to drive her from my side, to be murdered. I would as soon thought of kneeling myself on the block, as to see my best friend. Father positively forbid my takeing her off - I hope God will forgive me for the disobedience, but I was obliged to do it. Mary Robinson and Joe Smith took her to Memphis in the buggy to Ed and Rhoda. I know they will love her - none of them sympathise or appreciate the sorrow it gave me to part with poor Beulah. Old Wright's drunken son has been prowling all over the place tonight, shot Ben's dog, Edmondson's battery both white and black started after him, met him in the lane, he cocked his gun and flourished it - cowardly dog, sneaked off after that. Laura, Tip and I all alone, oh! my poor, poor Beulah, how can I do without you -
April, Sunday 3, 1864
This has been a sad and lonely day for me - I miss my poor Beulah so much. Tippie Dora has not come tonight, so Laura and I are all alone. Tate, Joanna, Nannie, Robert, and Uncle Elum all went to Church. Father went up to Mr. Hildebrand's, Helen was at home, spent the morning in her own room. My sainted Mother, how different from what you wished, to see your two youngest born so widely separated, both in thought & feeling - it is not my fault, I pine for a companion, yet she is happier with those of her choice -
I spent the morning in Father's big chair, reading. I read the book of Romans, Father returned but had no news. We have not heard from Forrest since he crossed the Cumberland at Eddyville. God grant us success throughout the State, and return my Bro safe to us once again. I spent the morning alone, grieving for my lost friend - just one week ago this eve I had a long walk, with her as companion, but now I, oh! it makes no difference to any one but myslef, why do I thus complain. A hard storm of rain and wind is raging. Laura learning her lesson. Bettie did not come tonight. Father of mercy give me hope, brighten my life, oh! give me a companion, or my mind is lost. Thy will, not mine oh! Lord be done - Tip just arrived
April, Monday 4, 1864
The days now passing are of so much paine and unhappiness to me, it is with the greatest difficulty I can have patience at night to make a record of my sad life. The weather today as gloomy as my feelings - cold and drizzling. Anna Nelson spent the morning, I went in to sit with her, did not stay long - oh! for happiness and peace - there is no love or sympathy for me there. I did not sit in the Parlor long after Tea - Father retired early - Laura and Bettie had a very good lesson - Laura now deep in slumber. Tippie Dora in bed asleep, but my poor Beulah, alas, the best of friends must part - I am alone, all alone, there is a mournful spell in the heart echo of that simple word, even when it bounds through the warm blood of youth! - I have thought until my brain feels like a burning fire - it is 1 o'clock, yet where is sleep or rest for my weary spirit - oh! heavenly Father, have I not suffered enough - remove this trouble, and if I am not humble then return it to me. Oh! try me once again, bless me and brighten my hopes - and guide and lead me in the paths of Righteousness.
April, Tuesday 5, 1864
I was awakened at daylight by a servant with a note from Miss Hudson who has succeeded in getting all she wants out of Memphis, and promised to take the things I had for Mrs. Hudson to her. I regreted not having all the things through the lines, but sent what I had - Although awakened, I did not think it too late to take a nice little nap - which thanks to Laura lasted until 10 o'clock. Breakfast I have no taste for, yet as Laura brought it to my room, I tried to treat it with politeness -
Nannie, Helen and Father were all gone to the funeral of Mrs. Barton's little girl. I spent the remainder of the morning alone, met all at dinner, no deffinite news, some say Forrest has returned, I think though tis only prisoners sent through - Sewed some today, all together a dull, lonely time. Tip and Laura as usual asleep - I thinking, and wondering when I can be relieved - God be with me, Guide, protect and make me a christian -
April, Wednesday 6, 1864
Laura awakened me this morning with the news that Beulah was at my door - oh! it seems there is always something to trouble me. Father allowed her to be chained, and so far has not killed her. We were very much surprised this morning by the arrival of five of Forrest's men - Eddie & Elb leading the advance, while Capt. Jim Barber, Capt. Farrell & Mr. John Kirk brought up the rear - oh! I was so happy, we have spent a delightful day, have taken it time about standing Picket, with the horses hid in the woods - Geo. Anderson came running up, had just had a nice race with the Yankees - in a little while Joanna & Nannie came from town with the news the Yanks were camping on Horn Lake creek tonight, having heard Forrest had a good many of his men in here on leave - they will have to be right smart if they get our five, with the assistance of Edmondson's battery for Pickets - We all sat up very late, I left them in the Parlor - tis so much happiness to see so many of our Rebel friends - oh! I am happy, yet miserable, my heart is never free from pain, have mercy upon me, oh! my savior, guide and give me happiness -
April, Thursday 7, 1864
I feel dull and stupid this morning - We have had a happy day, although the Yankees are still down the road.
Tate and Nannie went to the Pickets this morning, were turned back, the lines closed. Capt. Barber & Mr. Kirk cannot get their things. I had not the heart to see them disapointed, so rob'd old Mr. McMahon of 2d. Mo. Mr. Kirk took his Boots, Capt. Barber his uniform. I will get him more through the lines before he comes for them. I beat Capt. Farrell two games of Chess tonight, Father let us sit up just as late as we wanted to, and we had a delightful evening. Nannie &c very buisy sewing all day. Nannie & I made two shirts for a Kentucky'n who is so far from home, and no one to take an interest in his need. I sent him a pair of Pants too -
Joanna, Helen, & Tate made Eddie two - oh! I would give anything if I had it in my power to give them everything they need.
My poor Beulah is fast asleep at my feet, tomorrow I must give her up again, thank heavens Father is not going to kill her. All my little household all quiet in slumber.
April, Friday 8, 1864
A bright and beautiful day, yet a lonely one, our Rebel friends left us - and my poor Beulah was taken away again. Helen & Nannie went over to Mr. Harbut's, and took her to Willie Duke. Capt. Barber, Capt. Farrell, Mr. Kirk, Eddie and Elb went over on the Plank Road nearly to Nonconnah, did not see any Yanks, heard of a squad going into Memphis just before them, they came back just before dinner, did not have time to wait, as Laura was just done churning, they drank heartily of Buttermilk. I made them each a nice julep, they went off in fine spirits, yet I can never answer for one sad heart they left behind. I went to sleep after dinner, and slept until very late. Poor Mr. Noe, just two years today since he was wounded - I decked his grave with flowers, and his suffering during the eleven weeks I nursed him, after his wound, until the time of his death, were ever present in my mind. Father and I sat in the Parlor a short time after supper. Laura and Bettie worried me a great deal with their lesson. Poor Beulah, I miss her so much - will my troubles never cease, hope is my Talisman - every dark cloud hath it's silvery lining -
April, Saturday 9, 1864
What strange weather. cold, bitter cold & raining. Laura awakened me with the news that Lieut. Buchanon of 2 Mo. Cav. with two of his men were here. I hastened to dress, as I expected they would have some news - they came here last night about 6 o'clock to see if we could tell them anything about the Pickets. I dressed and went in the Parlor, he did not stay very long, had twenty men with him on an expedition to capture Cav Pickets - I regreted to learn from him this morning they had failed - they took french leave, we thought we heard the Yanks coming, they did not get this far, rob'd poor old Mr. Isbell of all his meat, and a great deal of corn, - fourteen in the squad, how I wish those Mo's could have known it in time to have captured them. Oh! mercy, I am so lonely - have not sewed much today, sat in the Parlor with Father a little while after tea. Poor Father, his heart is as sad as my own. L. & B. did not say a lesson tonight. Laura, Tip and I all alone, poor, poor Beulah - I sat up very late, alone, ah! the hearts echo of that simple word.
April, Sunday 10, 1864
Oh! what a relief to the weary, aching brain, when there seems naught for which to live; when this beautiful earth holds no joy; when the glorious sunsets, with their rose tinted clouds have no beauty; when our lifes barks seem drifting ceaselessly on, and we are powerless for good or ill - oh! what a relief to lie down, and closing our eyes, forget it all. To feel that at least while we slumber the scorpion-sting of memory is robbed of it's poison, - the goading, burning lash of human thought stayed, - and then comes a day, glareing again, - and so it goes on to the bitter end. We are all alike in this wicked human world. Let us strive as we will to soar above it, at last it all comes back to us - human hearts full of passion, love, and beauty - full of sin, sorrow, and suffering; the world overflowing with good and ill. Sometimes in life our value is appreciated, and we can claim true, affectionate, friends, - meet with lofty, generous souls, whose very beings thrill with instinctive love for the whole human race; but mostly we are not understood until the flowers and shadowy, green grass bloom and fade above us, and we lie mute below. Such is my life, how long it must be, no matter, God in his own good time will brighten my life. A beautiful day. Col. Perkins and Jimmie Greer spent the day with us, Helen & Nannie came home. I finished Corinthians - Father and all of us sat in the Parlor after tea. Laura & Bettie said a very good lesson. I am as usual alone, my two companions fast in slumber. God grant peace, we humbly crave, give us our liberty and make us a christian land. God bless my Brothers -
April, Monday 11, 1864
Helen, Father, the children and myself spent the day alone, the rest all in Memphis. Joanna came home, succeeded in getting Father's permit for supplies, brought no late news. Miss Perdue & Noble banished, leave tomorrow. I expect I will be next. I was so happy to hear Miss Em is expected today, my future plans depend upon her advice. Tate & Nannie staid in M. all night. Col. Overton came to see us today, just up from Dixie, - everybody hopeful and confident of a bright day soon. Mr. McMahon, 2d. Mo Cav came this eve. I was so disapointed about letting his things go - though he seemed perfectly satisfied, as he had replenished his wardrobe from Yankee Prison in Grierson's raids, he has been quite sick, is now on his way to Camp at Jackson, Tenn - he has his fine horse again. God grant him a safe journey, for he is a splendid Soldier. Gen. Armstrong with his brigade at Water Valley moving up - Ah! God is just, and I feel that we have not suffered in vain. We humbly pray for a cessation of this horrible war, oh! give us our independence & peace - We all sat in the parlor right late, Mr. Mc went further below. Tip & Laura both sleep, poor Beulah, I wonder where she is -
April, Tuesday 12, 1864
Mr. Jim Rogers arrived from Texas today, he and Mr. Farrer came over, Col. Perkins, Jimmie Greer and Col. Overton spent the day. Capt. Bissel was here, left two Pistols for me to take care of until he came back the last of the week. I went with Col. Overton over to Mr. Bray's, he took me to protect him from the Yankees, we had a terible trip, he went on down to Col. Perkins, we heard there was a Yankee Negro Soldier dead on Day's Creek, so Bettie, Kate, Robert and Mary & myself started in search. We found him, and it was an awful sight, he was in the Water in full uniform, his napsack on the bank of the creek, oh! I would give anything if I had not seen it. I have not done any sewing, house full of Company all day. I received a letter from Maj. Price and Mrs. Hudson, one to forward from Dixie, two from Memphis, one for Mr. Sam Wilson, one from Mo. to be forwarded to a Soldier to Mo. Brigade - No later news from Forrest, the Yanks in Memphis are frightened to death, think he is coming there. Miss Em has not come, I was so disapointed. Tate and Nannie got home. Bettie and Laura had a very good lesson -
April, Wednesday 13, 1864
This has indeed been an exciting day, heavy fireing all last night & this morn. Forrest has captured Fort Pillow - still in his possession up to this evening dispatches captured on yesterday, the fireing we heard was between the Fort and Gun Boats, the Yanks in Memphis are frightened to death - a squad of 15 came and made us feed them and their horses - staid here nearly three houres, hateful old thieves. I wish a squad of Confederates had come and captured the last one of them - they stole Mr. Wither's horses - Late this evening 9 of our soldiers passed the gate, too late to get those rogues, yet I think we will hear from them on Nonconnah very soon -
Tate, Annie Nelson and Joanna, with Uncle Elum and the wagon went to town, succeeded in getting through Father's supplies and a good many things, the Yanks stole three hats out of the wagon in Nonconnah bottom, oh! how I hate them - Col. Overton came, Nannie went down to Col. Perkins with him. Mr. Henry Nelson & Mr. J. Hilderbrand came to see us after tea. I have not sewed much today. L. & B. said no lesson. Thank God for the glorious news today - oh! that my Bro may be safe.
April, Thursday 14, 1864
A comparitively quiet day to yesterday, cold, cloudy and disagreeable. I have spent it with little use to myself, or any one else - done no sewing at all. Mr. Rogers spent the day with us, brought no late news. Col. Overton and Anna Perkins came after dinner, staid a very short while - Anna Nelson & Rebecka Robinson came by and borrowed a horse to go to Memphis - we did not hear whether they returned or not - indeed we have heard nothing reliable today. Father heard a rumor this evening that our Virginia Gen. (Robert Lee) had ruined the left wing of Grant's Army - God grant it may be so. Grant is a fool to think he can whip Gen. Lee. Gen. Stephen Lee is at LaGrange, Gen. Forrest still at Fort Pillow last account we had. God grant we may humbly receive the blessings which have brightened our little Confederacy, drive this wicked band from our Sunny land, give us liberty and peace - oh! make us a Christian nation - we have suffered, yet we deserved thy punishment, we humbly crave thy pardon, and beseech thy blessings - The night spent as usual with me, sit in the Parlor with Father a short while after Tea.
April, Friday 15, 1864
Today I have spent sewing, all for nothing, tried the waiste on tonight and it will not fit at all. I am so disapointed. Mr. Mancoat came this evening from Memphis. Forrest still holds Fort Pillow, the Yanks are frightened to death in Memphis, how I wish we could get possession of our City once more - navigation of the Mississippi above blockaded for the present, and I hope, forever to the Yankees - they have begun to forage on the Country, supplies rather short in Memphis. Just as I was wondering what there was in this day, worth recording, Kate came in and announced to my great surprise, Margaret had a baby. I left her Cabin about an hour ago, she said she had not felt well, and asked me to bring the little Goslins in my room. I have not heard how they are getting along - no one with her except Bettie, Harriet, and Myra. I did not stay in the Parlor long after Tea. Laura and I have spent the evening nursing the Goslins. We heard the sad news that Mr. Gates and Mr. Cy Smith were both dead, belonged to Henderson's Scouts, captured at a party, died in Alton Prison. Oh! so many of our bravest and best young men are passing away. God spare my Brothers, and bring them safe to the heart of my poor old Father.
April, Saturday 16, 1864
Another day of excitement - about 30 Yanks passed early this morning, only six came in for their breakfast, they did not feed their horses - they behaved very well, and seemed to be gentlemen, in fact we so seldom see gentlemen among the Yankees that we can appreciate them when they are met with. While the squad with us were sitting on the porch, the squad which went to Mr. Hildebrand's passed with two of his horses, which they were takeing to Memphis. Anna Nelson came down this morning, the Chicago Times of 12th. has a good letter in it from X - Forrest has left Fort Pillow, having accomplished all he went for - we have not heard where he is or what his movements are, yet are perfectly satisfied that we will have good news from him in a day or two.
Margaret and baby both doing well, she says I may name it, so I have named her “Dixie.” Mr. Rodgers came over this evening. Hal was down today but did not come to see us. We have no news of importance today, I have had a great deal of trouble with my Goslins. Sewed some little, yet feel that I have spent the day with little profit to myself, or anyone else, - beat Tate playing Chess tonight - my little room as usual, my Lamp all right again.
April, Sunday 17, 1864
For what? am I liveing? - why is it that I am spared from day to day with no happiness myself, and I am sure my poor weary life adds not moiety of pleasure and happiness to any one in this household. Oh! give me strength, give me patience my blessed redeemer, to receive thy punishment with meekness and humbleness - and faith that in thy own good time all will be well -
Tate and Helen with the children went down to Col. Perkins to spend the day, came home this evening in the rain. Col. Overton came this evening, did not stay many minutes, went to Col. Perkins to meet his friends -
Father, Joanna and I have spent the day alone, indeed I have been all alone, only saw them at dinner - read two books in the Bible - Galations & Ephesians - We heard Forrest had Columbus, Ky, can't vouch for the correctness of the report - God grant it may be so, and that Eddie is safe - Laura and Bettie said a very good lesson tonight - My Goslins have given me a great deal of trouble - did not stay in the Parlor long after Tea - spent the evening alone as usual, Laura & Tip both sleep - My poor Beulah, I wonder where she is tonight - how much I miss & grieve for her, no one cares, or knows -
April, Monday 18, 1864
Well, I expect our days of peace and quiet are over, another squad of Yanks passed - four stoped here, staid until after dinner, and went on back to Memphis - all of them, except one, seemed to be gentlemen, this one was a black abolitionist, oh! how I heartily despise him - I promised to make a Confederate Flag for one of them, Mr. Greer, and he promised he would not reenlist, so I have spent the evening making one, and will give it next time he comes. We were fortunate in their visit, they only ate their Dinner - Forrest was fighting at Columbus, Ky. on yesterday, no particulars. God grant he was successful, and my Bro. is safe.
I have sewed all day, yet not accomplished much - did not stay in the Parlour long after Tea, - no use in my recording why.
Laura and Bettie are improving very fast, recited a very good lesson tonight. The Goslins are a great deal of trouble, Laura and they are fast asleep on her pallet -
My Mother, oh! my Mother, how long must I leave thee, my heart yearns for thy sympathy, thy advice. Oh! God have mercy on me - No news from my dear Miss Em - oh! hasten her arrival - I shudder for my mind - Oh! my dear, my beautiful Savior, have mercy on me -
April, Tuesday 19, 1864
No Yanks today, a heavy raide passed down on Pigeon Rooste Road, do not know their destination. No news from Forrest, and the Yanks do not seem to know where he is. We have not seen any one today, or heard a word of news. Joanna and Bettie went to Memphis today, Sallie went with them - got a Permit - I am going to try my luck in the City tomorrow. I scarcely know what to think about it, or expect, but I do not believe all I have heard. Father is not willing I should go, I must change though, I cannot live always thus. Sewed all day, finished my white wrapper. My poor little burnt Goslin died, I have a great deal of trouble with them.
Bettie and Laura did not say a lesson tonight, Bettie said she was too tired, and it was not five minutes until Laura was asleep - I am right sick tonight, and so lonely. No news from Miss Em yet, I am very much afraid she will give up her visit -
Forrest keeps so buisy on the Miss. River - The days of my present life are not worth recording - and I am sure the trouble and sorrow are indelibly ground on my memory and heart -
April, Wednesday 20, 1864
Tate and I arrived in Memphis quite early, put the horse up, then walked up street together, met Nannie and Anna Perkins. Nannie gave me two letters, one from St. Louis to Mrs. Welch, an exile in La Grange, Ga. one from New York from a stranger, asking assistance to through me to communicate with Mrs. Van Hook at Selma, Ala - I received a letter from Maj. Price at Selma, by Mrs. Flaherty. I dined with Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Kirk - went round for Hat after dinner, she went with me to see Capt. Woodward, to know what I must do in regard to an order which I heard was issued for my arrest - he advised me to keep very quiet until he could see the Provost Marshall and learn something in regard to it. I came to Mrs. Facklen's, although she has a house full of Yankees boarding with her - they seem to be very gentlemanly, Dr. Irwin and Dr. Sommers, the latter has his family, Wife and two children - We spent a pleasant evening at Chess &c. Mrs. Facklen has been very fortunate in her selection of boarders -
April, Thursday 21, 1864
I went round according to appointment, met Capt. Woodward at 11 o'clock. Col. Patterson went with me. Capt. W. had not seen the Provost Marshall, he went as soon as I left, came round to Mrs. Facklen's after dinner, and brought bad news - though having approached Capt. Williams as aid for a heroine of Jericho, he could not treat me as the order read - it was issued from old Hurlbut, I was to be arrested and carried to Alton on first Boat that passed - for carrying letters through the lines, and smugling, and aiding the Rebelion in every way in my power - he sent me word I must not think of attending Jennie Eave's wedding, or go out of doors at all, he would be compelled to arrest me if it came to him Officially, but as my Father was a Royal Arch Mason, and I a Mason, he would take no steps, if I would be quiet. Mrs. Facklen, Mr. & Mrs. Goodwyn, Mr. Leach and Dr. Irwin all went to the wedding - I staid at home, and spent the evening with Mrs. Summers, and the Dr. They were very pleasant, and not the least bitter in their feeling towards the South, ah! but they are Yankees, I can't forget it when with them.
April, Friday 22, 1864
All ready for breakfast this morning, notwithstanding the late hour of retiring last night - they all spent a delightful evening - the Bride looked beautiful, the groom charming, and all passed as merry as a marriage bell - It was a great disapointment to me, but rather too much risk, a trip to Alton would not be very pleasant. I ventured with a thick vail on, to go up town this morning and purchase me a few articles which I would be compelled to have if I am banished, only went to one store - Went to see Mrs. Worsham and Vine sent some letters to St. Louis to Mrs. Moore's from her husband. Anna Nelson came after me, but the detectives have been looking for me today, and I was afraid to pass the Pickets. I have certainly escaped wonderfully. Mrs. Sommers seemed very much distressed that I could not get through - we spent a very pleasant evening. Dr. Sommers and Mr. Goodwyn discussing the war, I enjoyed it very much, no anger or hard words, they both agreed to disagree, beat Mr. Clark three games of Chess, - did not sit up very late. I am miserable for fear old Gibbert gets me at the Pickets tomorrow. God grant I may get through safe -
April, Saturday 23, 1864
All ready for breakfast, and very much refreshed after a good nights sleep. Dr. Sommers leaves for Vicksburgh today, inspecting hospitals. I would not care if they had no hospitals, however he is very agreeable. I prepared for my trip directly after breakfast. Mrs. Sommers came in the room and seemed very much distressed that I was in trouble, and said that she would get the Dr. to get me a pass if I would wait until he came. I knew it was of no use to ask, the Provost Marshall said I must not, but consoled me by saying, where there is a will there is generally a way. This was hint enough, so I went to Mrs. Worsham's, and Kate went round to the Provost's Office and got a pass for herself and Miss Edmunds. I shall ever be grateful to her for it. I then started for Mr. Barbier's, came by and told Mr. Eyrich goodbye - came by Miss Perdue's, found Miss Mary & Annie just having their baggage searched to leave for Vicksburgh - banished never to return. I got through Pickets safe, Jack was on. Anna Nelson came out with me, we were caught in a terible storm, no trouble otherwise, found all well at home.
April, Sunday 24, 1864
This has been a terible day of excitement, two wagons from Memphis came out and camped in front of our gate all day, the Yanks did not bother them this morning only to take some Whiskey - two Confederate Soldiers were sitting in the Parlor all the time they were here, they did not see them coming in time to run, but fortunately they did not come in the Parlor. Mr. Falls and Miss McKinney, Sister of one of the Soldiers, came out to see them, the other Soldier was Mr. Hutchinson. I sent a package of Papers and letters to Mobile by Mr. McKinney, they had not more than rode out of sight when five Yanks came up all drunk, they robbed those people with the wagons of all their money, drank up all the whiskey and treated them shamefully, they had not been gone long before three Confederates, John & William Hildebrand and Ben Henderson came riding up, we told them about it, they rode off full speed, in a little while we heard firing, continued about five minutes, then all quiet. Father and Uncle Elam went down to Dave Hildebrand's after tea, our boys just left all right, - they met the Yanks returning, only four, and they frightened to death almost - no particulars. I am very much afraid, Laura, the Goslins, Tip and I all alone.
April, Monday 25, 1864
Father went first thing this morning to see if he could not hear something more about those thieving Yankees, - could not hear whether the Confederate squad gained anything or not - they went down to poor old Mr. Isbell's and beat him nearly to death because he would not show them the way to the plank road. Father and Mr. Madden went down there this evening to see him, a squad of Yankees passed, only two came in to get some buttermilk. Luce was one, we told him how those had acted yesterday, he reported it ti the Officer, and Father said they stoped at Mr. Isbell's and enquired very particularly about it, and said he would have the men arrested. Miss Annie Perdue, Sister and Bro. all sent through the lines today, banished. Washburn countermanded Hurlbut's order and sent them by land, instead of River. Miss Annie came over to see us, and get me to go over the creek for her. Father is rather afraid, but I will try it in the morning - though I expect not, Father has just left my room, and says he is afraid for me to go - I am so unhappy about the trouble I have got in - oh! what is to become of me, what is my fate to be - A poor miserable exile -
Poor Tip is very sick, and I am very much afraid she is going to die - the Goslins are well, Laura and I complete my lonely little household -
April, Tuesday 26, 1864
I arose very early this morning, Father was not willing I should go over the creek, went over to Mr. Farrer's to tell Miss Annie Perdue so she would make other arrangements about sending for them. I was so distressed to think she must be so disapointed, and I did not get to see her again. No Yankees out on our road today, all very quiet until this eve. We were all very much excited, surprised & happy to see Maj. Crump, he is just from Jackson, Tenn, where Gens. Forrest and Chalmers still have their Hd. Qts. Lee's Cavalry have gone to Ala. to check the raid advancing by way of Decatur - John Hildebrand and Henry Nelson came down and spent the evening with us - John Hildebrand beat me badly at Chess again - we have had a very pleasant evening with our Rebel friends, in spite of Yankee visits -
Father retired very early, all left the Parlor except Maj. Crump and Helen. Poor child, may God shield her from all dark clouds, oh! may she never feel or know the anguish which has been mine. God grant them a happy and peaceful union.
Tip is still quite sick, Laura and the Goslins have retired, - my poor lost Beulah, I wonder where she is tonight - and me, poor miserable being - oh! heavenly Father, have mercy and brighten my lonely life -
April, Wednesday 27, 1864
Tate and Nannie started to Memphis very early this morning, got back home without any trouble, and Tate was fortunate enough to get a permit, and kind enough to me, to bring what few things I had to me. No news, except they are just reallizing the terrible thrashing they received in La.
Maj. Crump went to the woods this morning, did not come in again until late this evening. Laura and I have been very buisy all day cleaning and arranging my room for summer, I had a splendid bath, and enjoyed it very much. The day has been so warm and disagreeable, tried one of my new white wrappers, first change of the season - Two of Henderson's Scouts came here after dark, Mr. Benson and Alexander, got their supper and fed their horses - did not stay long, sent a bundle of papers and letters to Capt. Henderson by them. Four soldiers came in after Tea - the same who broke up the abandoned farm, (Ball's) Saturday night, and I think they are on such an errand tonight, did not stay long, only until the storm passed over - Yanks - three passed this evening, did not stop. All my household quiet in slumber -
April, Thursday 28, 1864
Maj. Crump left for the bushes early this morning, did not return until the rain began, he sat in my room until supper was ready, Helen, Tate and Nannie have all been out here all evening buisy sewing on Maj. C shirts. I finished mine before the storm came up. Mr. Wesson came after Mr. Wallace's things, he has not left yet, will start in the morning -
Seven Yankees and a cotton buyer came today just after dinner - did not harm anything, only wanted some milk, and to know the way to the plank road - we were very fortunate once again - they did not even come in the house. We have not heard a word of news today - all spent the evening together in the Parlor, Music &c. I beat Maj. Crump at Chess. Father & Mr. Wesson retired early. I sat up right late, trying to get Mary to sleep, succeeded at last, left Nannie, Helen and Maj. Crump in Parlor, found Laura sleep in the chair with her work in her lap - Tip had not arrived - the Goslins taking their lunch - and I, poor miserable being, praying for strength, and patience, for thy will, oh! Lord - Tate had a letter from Eddie & Capt. Barber -
April, Friday 29, 1864
Joanna and Nannie went to Memphis early this morning, and have not returned yet, Father is very uneasy about them for fear they are in trouble with the Yankees - none have been out today. Maj. Crump spent the day in the woods again - another storm this evening which bro't him home rather early, he came in my room where we were all buisy sewing - Tate is making Capt. Barber's shirts, - Helen buisy getting ready to go South - which she thinks will be about the first of June. I have made “Dixie” five dresses, and have one to make yet, then I will have fulfilled my agreement for the privilage of naming her - Mr. Crawford spent the day with us, waiting for Nannie - Mr. Wesson left early this morning with his goods - we have no late, reliable news today. All spent the evening together in the Parlor. Father and I retired early, left Tate, Helen and Maj. Crump is there. All my little household together - Poor Beulah, I will always miss her.
April, Saturday 30, 1864
Laura brought my breakfast to my room - very late - everybody slept late this morning - Raining, raining, raining - oh! such a gloomy day as it has been. Joanna & Nannie have not come yet. Nonconnah is swimming, but Father is miserable for fear that is not what keeps them.
Maj. Crump left about 10 o'clock, we have not heard how he got through, but heard of no scouts, and reckon he is all right, some where in Panola tonight. Mr. Bray brought Nannie a letter from Dashiell, all of the fords on Nonconnah are heavily picketed - the Gurrilla's ambushed a scouting party of fourteen, at Pigeon Rooste crossing on yesterday, killing the Yankee's three horses - wounding two Yanks and capturing three and one horse, only six out of the crowd got back to Memphis - they are very much exasperated - the lines have been closed since, and that may have detained the girls - hurrah! for the Dick Davis and his band - I hope they may break into this thieving band of Yanks roving over the Country - both of Helen's little pups died today -
God bless our armies and give us success -
May, Sunday 1, 1864
I slept very late this morning. Tate and Helen ready to start to Church when I went in the Parlor - Uncle Elam went with them. Father, Mary, Robert and I were left at home. Mr. Hildebrand and Mr. Madden spent the morning with us - they had no late news - neither did we hear any from the girls. Five Yankees found where John, William, Ben & David Hildebrand and Ben Henderson were hid on Day's creek, about a mile from here and surprised them, although they were fast asleep, they made their escape. The Yanks fired twice only, our little band were not armed armed for a fight, therefore beat a hasty retreat. The Yanks then came to old Mr. Hildebrand's, did not stay long, we saw them pass on the ridge returning to Memphis.
Nannie and Joanna have not returned yet, cannot imagine what keeps them. The Yanks sent out a heavy force after Forrest yesterday. God bless our little band, and crown them with victory - guide my Bro, and keep him safe through all danger - Came to my room early - Father retired so early - We think the Yankees are at Mr. Hildebrand's now, so much noise, and two guns fired. God bless my dear Father, and protect him from the Yankees.
May, Monday 2, 1864
Very cold and disagreeable - had to keep large fires to keep warm. No Yankees have been out today - the lines are still closed, Nannie and Joanna have not got home yet. Cousin Frazor, John and Mr. Wormely got here from Dixie today - everything is cheering from below. Gen. Price has demolished Stith's entire army, capturing all of his Artillery, Wagon train and demoralizing his entire command. We have not heard from Forrest yet, but our faith in him is implicit, he will be successful. Oh! I think the bright day for Dixie is dawning. God is just, our prayers are answered, oh! let us be humble, and pray constantly in our success, thy will, not ours, be done. I made Laura a dress today - Sallie Hildebrand & Mary Robinson came down and spent the evening - Mr. Wormely went on over to Mr. Holmes - the Hildebrands all got off safe last night , everything has been unusually quiet in the neighborhood today - I did not stay in the Parlor very late. Bettie & Laura both buisy sewing.
May, Tuesday 3, 1864
The lines still closed, no news from Memphis, can't tell when Nannie and Joanna will be home - I did not get up until nearly dinner, spent the remainder of the day sewing for Laura, trying to get her clothes in order, it seems I can never get her again for any length of time. No one has been here today. John spent the day hid in the woods with Cousin Frazor's horse - Father as usual running round trying to hear the news. I think the Country is rather dull, since the blockade - This is a lonely day in my weary life, and I can record nothing which would give, either pleasure or profit in after years to look back upon - the children have been happy at play - and I expect Helen and Tate have passed the day pleasantly together - mine has been alone. Father and Cousin Frazor left the Parlor early after tea - John & I sat up right late talking, and I played for him. Laura is still sewing and nodding - no bread for Goslins, they are very noisy
May, Wednesday 4, 1864
I have sewed buisy all day, finished my white braided swiss - I think it is beautiful. Laura finished her new Calico, we both had to sew very late tonight to finish them. Bettie got sleepy and went home some time since - We all had a considerable fright tonight - by Anna Nelson sending to warn us of danger if any Confederate Soldiers were here - so poor Johny, although he has spent the day in the woods, shouldered his blanket, took his Pa's horse, and went to the woods. Cousin Frazor will stay in and take the chances. Capt. Floyd with 20 men passed about dusk, going across the creek, don't know their destination - the lines open this evening - Joanna and Nannie got home - no news of interest - We are still victorious on all sides, the negroes have raised the black flag - gone out on a raide after Forrest, and I will bet, but few will ever return, - God grant not one life of our dear Soldiers will be sacrificed to those cowardly dogs. Oh! give us victory, that peace may once again smile on our Sunny land. God bless my poor old Father and dear Bros.
May, Thursday 5, 1864
I have spent a most unhappy day, - half sick, and the “black spirits” haunted me teribly - oh! I don't know what is the matter with me - or what on earth is to become of me. I spent the evening sewing on Harriet's dress - Laura and Bettie both sewed late, yet I am left alone, and no prospects of sleep relieveing my poor, weary, aching heart - I pray for hope, and patience, yet virtue is lost in everything to me in my present state of feeling. Old Mrs. Holmes, Mr. Wormely, & Bedford came over this evening, no news except a rumor that Forrest had beaten the Nigger troops who left Memphis - God grant it may be so. Poor Danie Donelson's body has been found, at Pounder' ford, he was murdered, on his way back to the Army - his only Bro was killed at battle of Chickamauga - oh! heavenly Father, give us peace, crown our Sunny land with victory & peace, guide my dear Brothers, and return them safe to our Father's now lonely fireside - we humbly crave thy pardon, thy forgiveness and peace.
May, Friday 6, 1864
I got up very early this morning, finished Harriet's dress a little after dinner, just one day making it, I have picked my finger almost to the bone, and will have to rest for a few days and let it recruit. I slept all the evening, have spent the day alone, and it has seemed teribly long. No Yankees out on our road today. A heavy scout passed down the Hernando road, a very heavy picket on Nonconnah, since Floyd's raide yesterday - poor old Mr. Farrer got in trouble yesterday, the Yanks carried him in Memphis and put him in the Irving Block, we have not heard any of the particulars. Cousin Mat, Frazor & Cousin Sallie came out this evening, - news, we have another victory on Red River, captured three more Gun Boats - Oh! how thankful we are for the bright days which are dawning - we humbly crave thy blessings for victory and peace - Received a letter from Jimmie in London, the crew men all well and in fine spirits - God bless both my dear Bros, and guard them from all danger and temptation - bless my poor old Father, and keep trouble from his last days - oh! make me a better woman. Frazor is 9 years old today - we have not heard from Eddie for several days.
May, Saturday 7, 1864
I went over to Mrs. Clayton's early this morning to make arrangements with Hal about going South, did not find her at home, waited until after 3 o'c but did not get to see her. Spent a very pleasant day - heard no news - came by Mrs. Duke's to see Beulah, poor Dog, she was almost crazy when she met me. I could not stay many minutes, and it almost broke my heart to see Beulah begging to come. Peter and I started on home, met two Yankees, they were drunk, and frightened me very much. We had a very rough trip home, came through to the Hernando road, the Pickets on Nonconnah did not ask me for a pass. Saw old Mr. Farrer just getting home, he has only one week to be out of this country. A Yankee detective with a woman came to stay all night, Father was afraid not to take him, just after they stoped, in came two of the 2nd. Mo. Cav. Mr. Grile and Mr. Davis, they did not come in when we told them who was here, for fear it would get Father in trouble - the detective (Lewis) was very uneasy for fear they would take - I hope they will get him after he leaves here in the morning -
May, Sunday 8, 1864
I had a nice time sleeping late this morning, and Laura had a nice, Breakfast to tempt my apetite when awakened - the Detective and his lady friend had left before I got in the Parlor. John and Cousin Frazor kept in the dark all morning, though every was quiet, we have not heard what the raide was for which passed down Hernando road yesterday, they staid in Hernando last night. Old Mr. Hildebrand came down after dinner, though we have not heard a word of news today - in fact it will be almost a nonentity in the pages of my sad and weary life. I have read in my Bible mostly - went to sleep after dinner, and did not wake up until late in the evening - all went to walk except myself. Anna Nelson and Mrs. Lewis came here for some Soldier clothes, but they had not been left here. I did not stay in the house late, Bettie and Laura gave me a great deal of trouble about their lessons tonight - all quiet now, Bettie gone home. Laura and the Goslins both fast asleep - I trust sleep will soon relieve my weary brain -
May, Monday 9, 1864
I slept very late, Laura came in to clean my room, did everything but make the bed, I told her if she would let me alone I would make the bed. I have been sewing on my white mull, did not get much done, have it all arranged, and hope to finish it tomorrow. We had a delightful rain this evening. Cousin Frazor bought John a horse today, from Mr. Madden. The two Miss Robinsons came over this evening, trying to find out where their Bros were, whom Floyd conscripted, we could tell them nothing, poor things I feel sorry for them, although they are such wicked people. Three Confederate Soldiers came riding up while they were here, I am very much afraid they will report it to the Yankees. I did not go in the Parlor after Tea, the rest were all in, singing and playing, which I enjoyed all alone on the Porch. Father sat a while - Laura and Bettie had a very good lesson - all asleep now except myslef, and I am prepared for a nice feast in one of the Waverly's - the Abbot, it will draw my mind, for a while at least, from it's own sad and weary thoughts -
May, Tuesday 10, 1864
Cloudy and rainy, I got up to breakfast as Mr. Harbut came, he is cut off from his command, and has no news. We heard Forrest had got safely out of Tenn. Tate and Joanna went to Memphis this morn, did not get back and we have not heard a word, suppose the raine must have kept them, we had a very hard storm this evening. Mrs. Franklin & Miss Kate Daughterty arrived from Dixie this morning, they say we have had a glorious victory in Virginia, but a dearly bought one - loss heavy on both sides. The Confederates Victorious as always under our brave Gen. Lee. A sad loss will be our gallant Longstreet, we hear he is mortally wounded, heaven forbid the correctness of the report - oh! my heavenly Father, enlighten the hearts of our wicked foe, and let them leave our lovely land, - think of the thousands of souls hastened into eternity - we humbly crave thy pardon, grant us thy blessings, and give us peace, oh! give us peace - all we ask - drive them from our land, we have sinned, but now are humble. God bless my dear Father, and Brothers, and unite them once again -
May, Wednesday 11, 1864
Tate and Joanna went to Memphis this morning - what a mistake - on yesterday they went in, did not return until this evening. Joanna and Miss Em, and little Emie all came, oh! I was so delighted to see Mrs. Perkins - Nannie came out very early, started to go to Germantown, for John a horse, too late. Poor Cousin Mat and little Frazor had to return with Mrs. S. to M. - No news from Mr. Harbut yet - he is always very prompt, we think it very strange he did not return. We all spent the evening in the Parlor. Mrs. Tom Nelson came this evening - bro't intelligence of Poor Mr. Facklen's death - he killed himself drinking, died with Mania potin I do pity his Wife, and poor little children - and such a horrible death - no late news from either side - Miss Em and I talked nearly all night -
May, Thursday 12, 1864
Miss Em and I took breakfast in our room - it was bitter cold this morning, and I have taken my stove down. Mr. Nelson very impatient, Mr. Brett arrived about 11 o'clock, had succeeded in getting a pass for Mr. N. from Gen'l Washburn, good for one week - they left about 12. We all sat in the Parlour in the morning - after dinner Miss Em and I came out to my room and spent the evening - Nannie and Emie came also. Oh! I wish they would quit speaking of the war, or Politics. Cousin Frazor was tight at dinner, and as he and Mrs. Perkins differed, he was very rough and disagreeable - we did not sit up so late. Bettie and Anna Nelson reached home safe, but very late. No important news - no news from Mr. Harbut yet -
May, Friday 13, 1864
Miss Em, Joanna, Anna Nelson, Tate's children and Kate all went to Memphis this morning, all returned except Mary, who they left with Tate. We have had a quiet day, comparatively speaking. No Yankees - Mr. Wilson and Mr. Pope came this evening - been up several days, no late news. Poor Mr. Harbut was captured on yesterday, at Mr. Rutland's on the plank road, both of his fine horses captured - no news from him since he went into Memphis - Mr. Keene, who came out with Cousin Sallie, said Banks had certainly surrendered with 35,000 men - God grant it may be true - nothing deffinite from Virginia, though the slaughter has been terible on both sides. Oh! my Father in heaven, crown our Army with Victory - God give us peace, I am so weary of so much bloodshed - bless my dear Father and Brothers -
May, Saturday 14, 1864
Miss Em and I slept until almost 12 o'clock - I finished Emie's dress after getting up, Miss Em cut out her new Calico and run on the skirt. No Yankees today, neither have we seen a Confederate - Joanna and Anna Nelson went in this morning with the wagon to get supplies, as this is the last day the lines will be open. All of them got back safe with a permit for all they wanted. Tate came out with all of Helen's Bridal trosseau - still no decisive news from Virginia - papers all suppressed, which appears rather ominous - Oh! heaven hear the humble, and heart rending prayers of our poor suffering South, - drive the wicked Northman from our soile, protect and guide my Bros safely through, may they do their duty nobly - bless my poor old Father - I am miserable, what is to become of me -
May, Sunday 15, 1864
This has been an unpleasant, unhappy Sabbath - oh! we differ so in politics from Miss Em - I am afraid her visit will be miserable. Helen and Nannie went to Church - Col. Perkins came home with them, spent the evening. Capt. Wormely came over to spend the night, preparatory to leaving at daylight in company with Cousin Frazor and Johnie, poor John, he has not got him a horse, or his clothes - Mrs. Titus, his step mother, has treated him shamefully.
Miss Em had a talk with Nannie this evening, and she has been miserable ever since - I do not know what it is, but they are so widely different in Politics - I pray that Miss Em may not insist on Nannie leaveing. I shudder for the results, she says she will not go. We heard our Army in Va. was victorious - I pray that it may be so, and this horrible war closed. No communication with the City today, Miss Em speaks of going tomorrow - she has a free pass - she is sick in bed tonight - all retired very early -
May, Monday 16, 1864
Laura awakened me at daylight to see Cousin Frazor, John and Capt. Wormely leave for Dixie - they left early for fear they would meet a squad of Yanks later in the day. Miss Em and Nannie went to Memphis this morning, got back safe, no late news except Yankee lies, which say that we are beaten in Va. and I do not believe one word of it - never will hear the truth until we get the Southern account. Mr. Wilson came this evening, bro't me a package of Southern papers (Mobile & Richmond) though not very late date - therefore nothing deffinite from Lee's army - he had no late news, currier up yesterday - Nannie saw Mr. Harbut at the Provost Marshall today - he will be sent to Alton in a few days. Mr. Crawford came for Nannie today, was very much disapointed - I read all the morning, made me a dress waiste after dinner - Oh! how my heart has yearned for this visit from Miss Em, and how sadly disapointed, yet I have learned to bury my sorrow within my own breast - there is a terible gap in our social circle, we are so widely different in Politics.
May, Tuesday 17, 1864
Oh! most miserable day - Mrs. Perkins almost made me mad at her deep distress - Poor, poor Nannie, my heart aches for her, would to God I might be the medium through which all could be made happy - Miss Em is so widely different in her political feeling, there will never be any happiness, I fear, with poor Nannie. May God guide the dear child, keep her firm to the cause she has espoused, may she never have her pure, noble Southern feelings polluted with Yankee treachery or tyrany - keep her firm and true to her noble Brother Dashiell and his Country rights - she dreams not, but oh! my heart trembles and bleeds for her in this great trial and affliction. I received a letter from Dr. Moses - Tate did also - Oh! why am I tempted - guide, oh! comfort me, my Savior - poor Father is quite sick - Joanna went to Hernando this morning -
May, Wednesday 18, 1864
When, oh! when will this wickedness and strife end - my heart how sadly, and how sorely, it has been tried. God have mercy and keep it pure, through all temptations - bless poor Miss Em, be with her in this affliction, guide dear Nannie in the right path - I pray that it may be all right - thy will, and I am content - Col. Perkins came this morning, Nannie had not decided to stay when he was here. Mr. Nelson took dinner with us, on his way to Dixie. Mr. & Mrs. Lake came down here to meet him, missed him only a few moments. Mr. Crawford came this evening. Miss Em sent a note to Col. Perkins by him. Mr. Huchins was here also - with all the arrivals of persons and newspapers, no reliable news. My dear redeemer I pray, oh! I humbly beseech thee to bless our brave little bands in Va. and Ga - crown them victory, oh! give thy blessing to our dear Sunny land. Give us peace, then will we praise thy great and glorious reighn, through all eternity.
May, Thursday 19, 1864
It seems that trouble and misery will never cease. Miss Em almost killed herself with chloroform last night, did not get up until late this evening, and is still very feeble and miserable from the effects. Nannie has been in bed all day, seems to be quite sick tonight - poor old Father, he is almost prostrated with trouble. I wish I had some influence, oh! that I could be the medium of reconciliation & peace between Miss Em and the family - there is a breach which can never be healed - she is raving mad whenever she speaks or thinks of Tate and Helen - poor little Emie, the child is miserable. Heard from Dashiell last night, but do not dare to show the letter to his Mother. I think the scriptures are truly fulfilled in this war, Child shall be against Parent, and Parent against Child - Col. Perkins did not come - We have heard nothing deffinite from our Armys. Joanna got back last night with Helen's cotton.
I have been unhappy all day, no one could be in this house at this time and not be -
May, Friday 20, 1864
Mrs. Perkins went to Memphis this morning in an awful state of mind. Col. Perkins came up to see her before she started, but I do not think she was much relieved by his visit. Nannie would not go, she did not come back tonight, although she said she would be certain to come. I am entirely weaned from any affection I ever had for her, any Southern woman to talk and express herself as she does, I have no use for her. I wish to heaven she would never come to our house again. I went over to Mr. Clayton's, on old Grey, took Peter with me, did not get to see Hal, arrived at home safe, but very much fatigued. Laura and I had a very quiet, pleasant night all alone. Joanna tried our fortunes with the cards, if they are true I do not think we will have a very exciting life for the next few days -
May, Saturday 21, 1864
Nannie still sick in bed, got up this evening when Mr. Wilson came, I think that is the only thing which could have aroused her - Nothing unusual happened today, the news from Virginia still glorious. Oh, God! we praise, we humbly bow to thy glorious favor, of our struggle for Liberty - crown our Armys everywhere with decisive victories, and oh! we pray the for peace - Mrs. Perkins came home this evening, I am afraid she has made her arrangements for some revengeful feelings - her plans are entirely different from when she left. I did not imagine one I loved so much - I could so soon hate. Poor old Father is almost crazy with his troubles, yet the happy news from the Army keeps him up. Mrs. Perkins staid in my room and I had anything but a pleasant night -
May, Sunday 22, 1864
Everything has been in commotion, and anything but a quiet day. Mrs. Perkins is still disagreeable in her Politics - She and Nannie and Emie started down to Col. Perkins, broke down, came back, did not go until this evening - Hal and Mr. Clayton came today, we made our final arrangements for our trip, and will get off one day this week. Mr. Bray came over and made arrangements for Miss Tollison to go with us, she is going to marry Gen. Pat Claiborne - We have had anything but a pleasant say, Mrs. Perkins has been spouting forth her Unionism - everything has gone and we are quiet once more - I wish the day could have been more pleasant for Hal and Mr. Clayton - I wish I did not feel so bitter towards her - Thank God the news is still glorious for us from all quarters - Laura and I will have a pleasant night alone -
May, Monday 23, 1864
I was up bright and early this morning, went over to Mr. Hudghins to get his Wife, who is going to Memphis tomorrow, to bring me out a few articles, which I am compelled to have before leaving. The day I have spent trying to get my clothes arranged to have them done up tomorrow - it has been an unpleasant task, and altogether anything but a pleasant day to me - until this evening we were all made glad by the arrival of Sister Mary, Aunt Patsy, and our dear Sister's two youngest little Orphans - Sallie and Frank, also their nurse Nellie - both of the Children are beautiful, poor little things, how my heart aches for them, how sad is life to me without my Mother's love. Sallie is a sad little creature, very much like her Mother in appearance. Frank, the baby, is all life & happiness, they came all the way from Pontotoc in an Ox wagon, just one week coming. Mr. Wilson was here today - no later news from our Armys -
May, Tuesday 24, 1864
Little Frank waked me up this morning bright and early, I managed to get up and send Nellie, (who was with him) to the kitchen for his breakfast, he is prettier every time I look at him. Laura did not get to washing my clothes until 11 o'clock, but finished all except three dresses and has done them beautifully. Annie Nelson & Missie Morgan came out this evening - though the lines are closed, I don't know whether Mrs. Hudghins went in or not, if she did not, I don't know what I am to do about the things I sent for. I finished my Peasants waiste, and think it beautiful. Oh! I am so unfortunate, and unhappy - I pray for patience and submission.
No later news from Va. or Ga. I did not go in the Parlor after Tea, - the rest all spent a pleasant evening I suppose - my heart is too full to venture in company. I put little Sallie and Frank to bed.
May, Wednesday 25, 1864
I have been quite sick all day, was taken some time in the night, Laura was very kind to me - and has been the only one in my room to see me today. Miss Em & Nannie & little Emie got home from Col. Perkins just before dinner. Poor Miss Em, she seems almost heart-broken that Nannie won't go with her. I pity her, and have forgiven all hard thoughts which once existed in my heart towards her. I wish this horrid war would not uproot so many social ties - I dressed late this evening, went on the Porch - very cool and cloudy after Tea, so we all moved in the Parlor - Sister Mary, Miss Em, Father and I spent the evening alone - the rest did not seem socially inclined, even Nannie did not come in, although it was her Ma's last night with us. Poor old Father, he tries to smooth over the ruffles all the rest make. God bless him and my dear Brothers -
May, Thursday 26, 1864
Miss Em was almost dressed when I awoke this morning. I was very much distressed to see her leave, in rememberance of the wickedness which filled my heart a day or two ago - I have entirely forgiven, and all unpleasant feelings have passed away. Poor Miss Em, she was the picture of dispair - did not get to see Dashiell, and little Emie, oh! 'tis hard for horrid politics to interfere with social feelings - They all left quite early for Memphis. Joanna and Robert got back safe - did not bring me anything I sent for - I am very much disapointed - but must think of some other way - Capt. Farrell arrived this evening - left Tupelo on yesterday morning - all the boys were well, most of the Batalion had gone to Alabama, Eddie was among the number - News is all we could wish for - by the grace of God Lee is still victorious. God bless our Armys, my dear Father and Brothers - Yankees gone to Hernando on a raide - have mercy and make me a better and more useful woman -
May, Friday 27, 1864
Sister Mary and I started early over to Mrs. Armstrong's - found both Mr. and Mrs. A. at home - and as usual my best friends in trouble. Mrs. A. is going to Memphis tomorrow, and will get all the things I need and bring them out to her house. Sister Mary has made arrangements to go to town with her tomorrow to get her watch - We spent the day with Hal and Mrs. Clayton - after dinner we all came over to Mrs. Seymour's to welcome she and her husband, who had just returned from their bridal trip - poor Beulah, I met her again, she was so delighted to see me, and it almost broke my heart to part with her, how much I love my poor dog.
Laura, Tip and I have sat up very late - I have been talking to Laura, Father will not let her go with me, I trust and pray that she may be guided through all temptation, and come to me just as I leave her - I am very unhappy to think of leaving home -
May, Saturday 28, 1864
Sister Mary and I arrived at Mrs. Armstrong's quite late - they went on in town, I drove over to Mrs. Clayton's and spent the day. Hal is not ready to start yet, so it is doubtful whether or not we leave Monday morning. Maggie Cockrell was there, we spent a very pleasant day - I got back to Mrs. Armstrong's quite late, found Sister Mary impatiently waiting. Mrs. A's kindness I shall never forget - she bought all my things, and brought them through the lines, they are all just as nice and pretty as can be. I left my bundle with the dress in it, when we started, so that will make another trip tomorrow, which I hope Nannie and Helen will take for me. Father gave me a deed to Laura this evening, I am grieved to leave her, exposed to so many temptations, but hope the principal I have always endeavored to instill may save her. My room is all confusion, trunk not packed - every thing scattered.
May, Sunday 29, 1864
Today has been an eventful one in the dull pages of my life - Bettie awakened me, standing by the bed, with a hot cup of Coffee - which I enjoyed very much, after refreshing myself with a cold bath.
Mr. Wilson came by, with late despatches, letters and papers - the latter containing news which paralyzed me for a while, oh! such a shock, yet I had expected it - (At Arcola, Ala. April 27th. 1864, by Rev. Mr. Beckwith, G. A. Moses, P. A. C. S. to Miss Sallie S. Anderson, of Mobile, Ala.) there is a future, oh! thank God, thy will not mine be done - in thee I trust, in thee I shall be saved -
Father went over to Mr. Bray's, but failed to get a conveyance for me to go to Dixie in - Helen and Nannie went over Nonconnah to get the bundles I forgot, and also to see Hal - she has not all arrangements made, and will not be ready before Wednesday. Our news today is very encouraging - thanks to the Almighty the day for our glorious Confederacy & independence is brightening. Packed today - Laura & I spent the evening alone - God bless my servant and take care of her. God bless and protect my dear Father and Brothers.
May, Monday 30, 1864
Began the day quite early - drew off the pattern on Nannie's dress first thing - Tate asked me to fix the Machine, she sewed for me while I did it - Father went over to Mr. Farrers to see Mr. Hodge, and try to trade for his Spring wagon - he asked so much for it, I hope Father will not get it. I and Peter went over Nonconnah to try and get one from some place, failed three times, when Joe, Mrs. Clayton's gardener told me of a Mr. Smith who had one. Dink and I went over to Mr. S. we soon made a trade - only $75.00 for the wagon, tied the buggy behind, started for home again - stoped at Mrs. Duke (Seymour) saw her and Hal - no news - had a rough and troublesome trip home. Arrived safe, Father likes the wagon very much - so I am all ready for Dixie, don't know what day Hal will be here. Laura finished my dress and hemed three handkerchiefs - I don't know what I would do without Laura -
Glorious news from the South, we have been successful in all battles - Lee whipped Grant, Johnson & Sherman - and Forrest old Dutch - Bless my dear Father and Brothers, take care of, and guide Laura -
May, Tuesday 31, 1864
I slept very late this morning - very buisy until dinner was ready packing and drawing off the pattern on Nannie's swiss. Aunt Patsy sat in my room, just as we were going to dinner an Ambulance with Yankee escort rode up to the gate, Mrs. Perkins comeing for Nannie - Nannie and Helen with Laura ran to the Woods, then followed a scene which I trust I may never witness again - such excitement and confusion - they scoured the woods for them, but no where to be found - Nannie has not been back since - and I expect is in Senatobia tonight - God guide and protect her. The Yanks staid about two hours & I think left disgusted with their trip, thinking, until we told them, they had come for a little child. Mrs. Perkins left in anger, swearing vengeance on Tate and Helen - Poor Father, it has broken him down, he is sick in bed. They are all ready and hope to get off by daylight - have mercy my dear Savior and spare my poor old Father any more excitement - guide us aright - and protect and shield our household -
June, Wednesday 1, 1864
Tate had me awakened at daylight this morning - they had some trouble and confusion before we started. I drove my Spring wagon, with Tate, Bettie, Robert and Nannie as passengers. Helen rode horseback on old McGruder - Uncle Elam, Willie Perkins and Peter with the baggage went in the Wagon. We traveled very slow, arrived at Col. Perkins half past ten, with no accident, and a very pleasant trip, Mr. Read's wagon had been waiting since daylight for them, so as quick as the baggage could be changed they started on for Dixie, and I hope are safe in Confederate lines tonight. Nannie and Harison stoped at Mr. Reid's in Hernando last night, left at daylight. God forever protect her from the tyranny of her Mother and the Yankees, 'tis an awful step, but I trust it is right - Mr. Wilson came to Col. Perkins some time after they had left, was very much disapointed at not seeing them, he, Mr. Crawford, the children and I spent a very pleasant day. Mr. Wilson came some of the way with us, we had an awful time from Horn Lake in a thunder storm, arrived at home, found Father composed & satisfied. We all spent eve in the Parlor - Laura and I all alone.
June, Thursday 2, 1864
I slept late this morning. Laura brought me a cup of Coffee to my room, which I enjoyed. We had a very quiet day, after the great excitement of the two days just passed - very cloudy & showery. I have made me a nice traveling sun-bonnet, and began my white swiss waiste - did not get very much done to it. Not one word from Hal yet, think very strange, as she was almost sure of coming yesterday morning. Joanna will go over tomorrow to see what is to pay - Anna Bradinaz came over this evening for Miss Tollison to see when we were going. Sallie Hildebrand came to get me to take her Brothers, in Jackson's Cavalry, some things. Mr. Wilson and Mr. Rutland were here this morning, no late news, did not come in the house, as we are in constant dread of another raide from the Yankees - Aunt Patsy, Father, Joanna, Sister Mary and I spent the eve together discussing passing events of our household - Frank and Sallie retired early - now Laura, Tippie Dora and I all alone -
June, Friday 3, 1864
Laura awakened me this morning at daylight. Mr. Wilson came to breakfast - had no later news than yesterday. We have everything to be thankful for, our Armys have, by the grace of God, been victorious so far. Mr. W. did not stay long after breakfast, will return tomorrow -
Joanna went over Nonconnah today. Hal has not been able to get a horse yet, but expects to be along tomorrow. I hope she may, for Father is so anxious for us to get off, did not hear any news from that direction. This has indeed been a gloomy day - cloudy and raining all day - Father spent the day in his big chair reading “Small house at Allington.” Aunt Patsy, Sister Mary & I spent the day in Tate's room - I have almost finished my white swiss body. Sallie and Frank have been caged today, and right noisy. I wrote a letter for Marguerite after tea to her Mother in Holly Springs - the rest all in the Parlor. Laura and I alone except Tippe Dora who is nodding. I expect this is the last quiet night we will have for some time to come.
June, Saturday 4, 1864
This day has seemed like a month to me. I got up early and went to work to finish my white waiste, did not sew long before Hal came, on her way down to Dixie, we have been disapointed in getting Dr. Buntin to go with us, and Johnnie Armstrong is to be our escort to Pontotoc. Mrs. Wren will be with us to Senatobia. Mr. Seymour came this far with them, but returned to Memphis. Mr. Wilson came while they were here, did not have any late news, however we are confident of success, they are glorying over their victories from all points, yet say nothing with regard to the price of Gold. We had to disapoint Miss Tollison, Mr. Wilson carried the news. Hal and I each have a Spring wagon with our old Greys - I finished my waiste, my lunch fixed, and I believe everything is ready to leave now. We all sat in the Parlor after Tea - Father enjoyed the music very much. Sister Mary finished Helen's Bridal Gown, came out to the room with it to pack. Hal is asleep, Laura, Tippie Dora and I awake, I am very sad in thinking it is the last night in some time -
June, Sunday 5, 1864
This day has seemed a week to me - We had a very late start from home, Hal was first to wake, the sun was shining then, Laura sound asleep. After some delay we had breakfast, bid all the servants and home folks good bye and got off at 8 o'clock, poor Laura was greatly distressed. God guide her, and protect her from all harm - bless my poor old Father, and save him from such excitement as we are always exposed to - he came by Mr. Hudghins and got Hal's things for her, met us at the burnt chimneys, came with us over Horn Lake Creek, to see us safe, then went on back to go to Church. Oh! how my heart ached to see my poor hoary headed Parent leave me. Oh! God have mercy, have mercy - We did not get to Mr. Boyd's until 12 o'clock, rested about one hour, have traveled very slow all evening. Mr. Wilson is with us, we ate dinner at hurricane creek - have stoped for the night at Mr. Dennis's, four miles below Hernando, a very nice place, and our horses well cared for. Sat up until 10 o'clock, very tired, and will certainly appreciate the nice, clean bed. God bless my Father's household -
June, Monday 6, 1864
After all of our agreements &c about an early start, we did not get off until 8 o'clock, a terible, terible day we have ahd. Cold Water almost out of it's banks, and still rising - the slews swiming - Mr. Wilson picked the way or we never would have gotten through. Arrived at Cold Water Station in time to eat our dinner and feed. Met with a Negro man, coming to Senatobia, gave him part of our baggage, had to go twenty miles out of the way, by Luxahoma to cross Hickey Hayley - We missed the road to Mrs. Wren's home, had to travel until 8 o'clock, through Senatobia bottom after night, oh, how terible to think of. We never would have reached here had it not been for Mr. Wilson's kindness - found old Mrs. Arnold ready to receive is, where we are all now ensconsed, Mrs. Wren fast asleep - Hal taking Chloroform. I beged her not to, but to no availe - I am all alone. Mr. Wilson and John both retired. We have glorious news from Va. Gen. Lee has repulsed Grant, with heavy loss. God grant it may be so. Traveled two days and only 30 miles from home. God bless my poor old Father, and his household.
June, Tuesday 7, 1864
As usual, we had a very late start, a very nice drive to Mr. Wallace's - arrived about ten o'clock, found all home folks there, Bro. Geo. and John Titus came for them in two Ambulances. Robie and Mamie both well, poor little Rob, I have been grieved ever since I passed them, haveing caressed Mamie and not him, I will make up when we meet again - they expect to leave tomorrow or next day. We have had few adventures in our travels today, rough roads. Mr. Wilson has been extremely kind - We had some difficulty in passing over Talehatchie - the ferry boat had washed away, and we had a bad affair to get over in. We are staying in Panola tonight with Mrs. Dr. Philips, a friend of Hal's - she is very kind, and we were very fortunate in getting in. A very hard rain after we got here. Mr. Wilson went to Mrs. Moore to stay tonight. We have all made arrangements to start very early in the morning, however I ought not to record our daylight starts - Hal is suffering with tooth ache, has taken an opiate and sound asleep. God bless all at home, my precious old Father, and Brothers far away.
June, Wednesday 8, 1864
I think today will be long remembered, a hard rain before breakfast, Mr. Rodgers arrived just after, and had almost pursuaded us to remain over until tomorrow, when Mr. Wilson came up and said it was impossible for him to remain, of course we could never venture without him, so we packed up and left at 8 o'clock. I never traveled such roads in my life - creeks swimming, as we neared the City of Springport, in passing a school house, with the children at play, I greeted them with school, butter, when all hands joined, and I thought for a while Mr. Wilson had a skirmish on hand, we compromised however, when old Grey refused to pull up the hill and Mr. W. had to come to our relief - We ate dinner there, which was broken up by the hardest rain I ever was exposed to, we left the scene in disgust, and demoralized, had a terible time, almost swam clear creek - a rain and night coming on. We stoped 8 miles this side of Oxford at Mr. Bunch's, where Hal, Johnny & I are now enjoying the quiet of a room, still raining. I never laughed as much as when I awoke and saw Hal's face swolen, completely disfigured, relieved however. Mr. W. left early with a book to read - after all the trouble we have had a nice time.
June, Thursday 9, 1864
A bright and beautiful day, yet the roads very heavy, 8 miles from Oxford, hills all the way, left quite early - were very fortunate in getting to the place we did - Mr. Wilson with his usual kindness, assisted us greatly, in fact we would never have succeeded in getting through had it not been for him. We arrived in Oxford about 10 o'clock, stoped at the University, where Henderson's Scouts were camped, and put Mr. W. bundles out, he very kindly sent two Servants with us to take our baggage, and carry our horses back to Camp, indeed I do not know how Hal and I can ever repay him for his kindness to us during this trip. Lieut. Carman & Mr. Bacon came to the Wagon to see us, and get the late papers. Mr. & Mrs. Barr were very glad to see us, and have treated us as kind as our own relations. Mr. Wilson came round to see us this evening, we had a very pleasant time. John went to Camp with him. Mr. & Mrs. Barr, Emma, Hal & I spent the eve'ing alone. Hal & I slept all afternoon -
June, Friday 10, 1864
We have spent a delightful day, did not get up in time for breakfast, Mrs. Barr sent it to the room. After breakfast I cut, of a piece of Calico I had, Emma a dress, and two Soldier shirts - did not sew any. Mr. Wilson came this morning - Mr. Cummins also, the latter staid to dinner. Mr. Barr and all hands have been buisy trying to get us a Wagon, have not succeeded as yet. Wrote to Father this evening, and fixed a bundle of late Southern papers to send him by Johnie. We had just dressed to walk out to the University when Mrs. Goodman and Capt. Scales came, Mr. Wilson & Mr. Cummins also. We spent a delightful evening, but I always feel how sadly changed, how demoralized we are on the border when thrown in any society. Mrs. Goodman is highly accomplished - I like her very much. Charlotte Ingram came over after tea, we spent a very pleasant evening. I think though she is too affected. No news from Tate, or any of the party yet. Hal & I have a delightful place to stay, and are content to await their arrival. Mr. & Mrs. Barr are very kind to us.
June, Saturday 11, 1864
Hal and I ready for breakfast, Mr. Wilson and John came while we were eating for us to go out to the University, we had to waite some time for Mr. Cummins. Lt. McConnell, who has just returned from Helena with a Flag of Truce came to see us, I was very glad to see him - did not stay very long, before we had to start to fulfill our engagement. Mrs. Hilgard gave us some delightful Music, the Labratory, Librarys &c. were a great treat. Capt. Scales accompanyed us, also Lt. McConnell. Mr. Wilson & Mr. Cummins staid to dinner with us, left soon after. Hal & I went round to call on Mrs. Goodman, met with Capt. Scales, & Mrs. Toomy there, spent a delightful evening. Hal went to bed soon after supper - poor Hal, she is so easily discouraged, and has the blues tonight. Mr. Barr and I sat up quite late, had a very pleasant time, although the rest had all retired. I found Hal non talkative, and rather cross, when I arrived in my room.
Good news from Forrest, he has captured the Wagon train, and completely routed the raide, which left Memphis two weeks ago. God bless our dear Soldiers and my poor old Father.
June, Sunday 12, 1864
Our news from the front today is glorious, Forrest's victory is complete, captured 250 wagons, the Yankees in full retreat, Bell's brigade close on the rear, capturing straglers by the hundreds. Willie Pope, ad't of 7th. Tenn. & Capt. Tate of same, both killed - no other casualties mentioned. Raining all day, no Church. Hal has had the blues all day, we both had a long nap before dinner. I have spent most of the day reading, - Lay of the last Nibelungers, - which was loaned me from the University Library - Emma & I alone in Parlor when Mr. Wilson came, spent the evening - just at dark Helen and Nannie came riding up. John & Lt. McConnell with them, they stoped at Mrs. Barr's. John returned to Camp with Lt. McC - after tea Mr. Wilson and John came over. We all have had a delightful evening. Lt. McConnell & Capt. Wormely came late - they all staid very late, 12 o'clock. We had a nice lunch after we came to our room. Nannie and Helen are sleeping on a pallet. Mrs. Barr is so kind - we think of going on tomorrow - oh! 'tis so happy to be in Dixie. Poor Father, I wish he had all the good news tonight. God bless him. Tate & Bro. Geo. broke down in Panola.
June, Monday 13, 1864
[The following entry is in a different handwriting]
Nice morning, clear, and rain ceased. Met Miss Belle E. Miss Hal R. Miss Hellen E. & Miss Nannie P. all looking pleasant and gay as larks. They are en route for Tupelo and other important points in Dixie. It is a gay party, and I would be delighted to accompany them, but duty &c admonishes me not. Miss Belle says she feels sad - wonder why? I wish her sweetheart was here to accompany her. This would make her feel cheerful I know. Who is the favored gentleman, I wonder. Wish I know, for he is destined to be a happy man. From indications I fear my hopes for Capt. H. must cease. The ladies are now ready to start. Pleasant trip to you ladies, & may each one of you soon meet your sweethearts & have a gay and happy time, not only until you return, but through life. W.M. McConnell.
We are camped 6 miles from Lafayette Springs, nowhere to stay all night. Jim, Lt. McConnell's cook, who is driving our baggage wagon, cooked us a delightful supper - fried ham and eggs, Butter milk & Corn bread. We threw heads and tails and decided not to go on tonight - 10 o'clock, after tea, Jim cleaning up. Helen & John building a fire in an old store which we are to inhabit. Nannie & Hal sitting over the fire, I alone, writing the record of our adventures. Lt. McC. wrote for me before leaving Oxford, and I have no room - will recall all tomorrow.
June, Tuesday 14, 1864
We had a little sleep last night. Helen & Nannie fixed their pallets in the corner - Hal and I were just in front of the fire, an India rubber blanket to lie on, a shawl for our pillow, with only a light mantle for covering, we did not spend a very delightful night. John sat up in the corner and nod'ed - we all were up before daylight, our old store proved more comfortable than the open air. Our poor horses did not have a mouthful, we had no breakfast. Started on our journey at daylight, had a rough, disagreeable trip to Pontotoc, distance 15 miles, which we accomplished by 11 o'clock. Came by Mrs. Duke's and left Hal by the College and got Willie & Andrew. Met Bro. Will five miles from town. Mary, Eliza and all were delighted to see us - we had a splendid dinner, slept all afternoon. Tate and Bro. George arrived before sundown, came from Oxford today. Mary, Nannie and I slept together, Helen, Mary K, Bettie and Ann on pallets. It is delightful and seems like home for us all to be together -
June, Wednesday 15, 1864
All up and ready for breakfast - Jim started for Oxford early. I wrote to Lt. McConnell by him - John left for Tupelo, came back this evening.
Forrest's troops which have just achieved such a victory are at Guntown, will be in Tupelo in a day or two. Forrest himself was there. Such sad news - our brave and Christian Gen. Leonidas Polk, was killed yesterday morning at 10 o'clock by a cannon ball, a stray shot, in a skirmish. Oh! God have mercy on our Southern land, drive the wicked foe from our soile, and we humbly pray for thy mercy and peace. So many of our bravest and best have fallen - bless and protect my dear Bros and return them safe to my poor old Father.
We have all spent the day at home. Bettie took Mary & Robert visiting. Hal, Linn, Mary Martin, & Capt. Duke called this morning. Aunt Mary Gordon, Cousin Ginnie, Mrs. Clardy & little Annie called this evening. We have spent a delightful day. God bless my dear Father and his household - protect my dear Bros -
June, Thursday 16, 1864
Late risers this morning, but all ready for breakfast. John and Andrew went over to town after breakfast to get the Ambulances, we all spent the day with Aunt Mary Gordon, and a delightful time we had, her home is as beautiful as ever. Cousin Ginnie is so lovely, has a sweet little girl, Annie. I don't know which enjoyed the visit most, the Children or grown ones. I carried a Soldier's shirt to make, but did not get much done. Music and conversation the order of the day. Cousin Ginnie has a splendid piano. We had a hard rain and wind strom this eve, which delayed our return home rather late, arrived all safe and sound. After tea we all retired to our rooms, rather fatigued. No news from the Army today - and no news from home since we left. God grant that poor old Father's life may be quiet, and spare him to meet his children once more. God bless my Bros, and Oh! my savior bless our Armys and crown them with victory.
June, Friday 17, 1864
A stupid and unhappy day for me - the rest have all enjoyed it. I was in a sad mood, sat in the Parlor alone, sewing most of the time, made a Soldier's shirt, none in particular, after finishing it, read three or four chapters in Macario, an delighted with it, there is one character in which I find much sympathy, will not mention until I live through it. I was never so oppressed in my feelings as in the last few days, I cannot define it, yet I feel I cannot rush quick enough to meet my fate, with a knowledge I will shudder when it overtakes me. God have mercy on my poor weary spirit, give me strength and patience to calmly see thy will not mine be done. Our news is not cheering today, oh! God we have suffered, we have endured patiently thy chastenings, if it can please the, crown our two Armys now in action, with glorious victory, let thy smile brighten the Sunny South with peace, soften the hearts of our enemies, and oh! bless my dear Father and Brothers -
June, Saturday 18, 1864
Rather an eventful and pleasant day, we made preperations early for a visit to Mrs. Duke, but Bro. George is always slow, and did not go for the Ambulance until late. We were all very much surprised to see Lt. McConnell drive in it when it did arrive, we were delighted to see him, he drove us to where the prisoners were he was gaurding, at the barber's shop. Bro. George then took his seat. Mr. Wilson was with him, we were delighted to see him, had on his new Uniform, they did look so nice. Two detectives were the prisoners, one I have seen up on the lines, they all stoped at Mrs. Duke's on the way out, to Tupelo. Lt. McConnell, Mr. Wilson and Capt. Wimberly came in, did not stay long, John arrived from Tupelo, news Dashiell Perkins wounded, killed the Yankees who shot him, and saved his colors. John Harris & Joe Park killed, how sad - Capt. Henderson wounded. Tate, Bro. Geo. Nannie, Bettie and the children all went out to Aunt Mary Gordon's this eve. Hal, Capt. Duke and Miss Miller were to see us.
June, Sunday 19, 1864
A delightful day we have had, although it is Sunday. Jim, Decatur and John went over to see Hal this morning, Nannie came in with John Duke and went to Church, returned and spent the day with us. Robert came over and spent the day also - the boys came back to Dinner and we all had a gay time. Mr. Wilson came over after dinner, he and Helen went out to Aunt Mary's to tea, Jim and Decatur went out to see Tate, but returned to Tea. John, Decatur, and Jim all left for Tupelo about 9 o'clock, a beautiful Moonlight for their trip. Mr. Wilson staid very late, 12 o'clock, he, Helen, Mary and I sat out in the moonlight and enjoyed it very much, he leaves at daylight for Oxford. Lt. McC. did not return from Tupelo. We are hourly expecting Maj. Crump & Eddie. Wrote home today, sent letter by Mr. Wilson, I hope to hear from home before leaving for Ga. God smile upon our Sunny land, bless my dear Father and Bros.
June, Monday 20, 1864
Mary, Helen and I were up bright and early, waiting breakfast for Bro Will, for fear he would lecture us about sitting up so late. Capt. Duke brought Hal around early, I made the skirt to my Grenadine, Helen and Hal took a nap. Bro Will came to dinner and told us of another Yankee raide coming out of Memphis, after Forrest, of course we have no fears for our success - but poor, brave boys, how much they must suffer. No news from Maj. Crump or Eddie yet. Kate Herron & Valley Huntington called. Bro. Geo. Tate, Cousin Ginnie & the children came over this evening, did not stay long. Helen & Capt. Duke went riding this evening, Hal staid until very late. I have been reading Miss Evens last book - Macario - I like it very much, though not entirely satisfied with the fate of some of the Characters, have not finished it yet. We all chated for some time on the Porch after Tea - Bettie is sewing, has one of Tate's candles, so I have an opportunity of reading again -
June, Tuesday 21, 1864
I was up early this morning, waited for Capt. Duke some time before he arrived - we started, did not go far before we had to run in to Mrs. Martin's out of a hard rain. I was mortified, for I had not called on Mollie, we staid about an hour, and spent it very pleasantly. Arrived at Mrs. Duke's, Hal cut my dress for me, fited it, and help baiste. I never have any one to take an interest or help me with my sewing, and fully appreciate Hal's kindness. It has been rainy and gloomy all day, no chance for outdoor enjoyment, so Tate and I against Hal and Capt. Duke, spent the evening playing Euchre - Lt. McConnell arrived from Tupelo about dark, unfortunate with his prisoners, they having made their escape the night before. Capt. Duke & I, vs Hal and Lt. Mc. had a nice game of Euchre -
June, Wednesday 22, 1864
I came home as soon as I ate my breakfast. Lt. McC. came by to see Helen - we found Ebb Titus and Maj. Crump, the latter arrived last night, so we will have Helen's affair over tomorrow. Ebb went over to Aunt Mary's for Tate, they all arrived double quick, had arrangements all made up with Maj. C. Mary and I drove out to Aunt M. in the Ambulance, they were very buisy making preperations for the happy event. I finished my Grenadine this eve. Tate and her crowd returned to Aunt M. Maj. C. and his Bro. Lt. C. called this eve. Maj. staid to Tea. Jim and Decatur arrived from Tupelo. No news from Eddie yet, and I fear he will not hear in time to come - they all sat up so late, I retired, but Nannie with her loud talking awakened me. No news from the Army, but received a letter from home, all well, dated 10th, the Yanks to breakfast for three mornings.
June, Thursday 23, 1864
A bright and beautiful day for Helen's bridal. The boys all left soon after breakfast. Hal came over with Decatur, went home to fix up her things to go to Aunt Mary's. Nan and Helen went over before dinner, Mary, Hal, myself and Andrew and Willie went after dinner, Ebb driveing us, found all in readiness for the important event. Guests arrived late, we had a happy time in prepereing. Hal & Jim leading, Capt. Morton & I next, Mary & Capt. Scruggs, the last shall be first, so came Nannie & Lt. Crump, then the bride and Groom. All in readiness, the Minister proceeded, and in a few moments Helen, my baby Sister, was changed to the care of one whom I pray may make her life happy. My dear, my sainted Mother, we are now seperated, long has the link of affection which you strove to bind together been fading. I was forcibly reminded of it in her marriage, by her preference for Nannie as first bridesmaid. Oh! God bless and guide my poor bruised, weary heart, farewell Helen. I still had hope in our Mother's guidance until your test tonight. Annie Gordon and Willie Killpatrick added a heavenly picture to the bridal train in their part, Candle holders - Once more oh! God have mercy on me - oh! have mercy on me.
June, Friday 24, 1864
A bright and lovely day, but one of the warmest I ever experienced. We were all up at 8 o'clock breakfast. Hal, Nannie and I roomed together, tried our fortunes, and did not go to bed until day was breaking, did not feel like I had nay sleep at all. Helen was very composed, we went in her room as soon as Maj. Crump went down, we all met in the Parlor after breakfast. Lina, Tobe and Jack all came out, we had a nice time, Hal came home with them - Nannie, Mary, Robert and I came home before dinner, Decatur drove. I had a nap before and after dinner, therefore do not feel very sleepy, but I do think it is the warmest night I ever felt. Bro. Geo. and Tate came home this evening to pack up, prepareatory to leave in the morning. We have a house full tonight. Tate, Bro. Geo. and Rob in the Parlor, Nannie, Mary, Mamie and I in our room. Mary and I made a pallet in the hall for Jim. John, Ebb, and Decatur are enjoying it, from the way they are laughing and talking. Helen & Maj. Crump did not come over this evening, are going over to Oxford in the morning - poor Nannie is trying to fix her toe - the rest asleep. I am almost sufocated -
June, Saturday 25, 1864
The changes of life, how sad, oh! my heart how sad. A lively time until after breakfast, our little crowd began to scatter. Tate, Bro. Geo. Nannie, Mamie, Rob and Bet all left for Tupelo. Decatur and Jim left with them, Ebb started for Camp below Aberdeen. Maj. Crump and Helen called for a few moments, on their way to Oxford. I felt that my heart would break, may God protect and guide them both - grant their life may be happy, and no clouds gather in future over the bright present. Oh! Helen, my Sister, farewell, farewell. I have loved you when you little dreamed, even a thought was for you. Mother, oh Mother, hover near us, bind our hearts closer - God bless my dear Father, and his household.
Mary and I have had a very lonely time, John left after dinner, failed to get a wagon. I ironed for the first time this evening. Hal and Capt. Duke came over this evening, we will leave Monday for Tupelo, poor Mary, she will then indeed be lonely. Bro. Will and the boys retired early, Mary and I will soon follow suite, it is very oppresive, and oh! so lonely, so lonely. God have mercy on me -
June, Sunday 26, 1864
We had a late, and rather quiet breakfast, comparatively speaking, the little boys went to Sunday School and to our great joy and surprise Eddie and Jake Anderson arrived - came up to the Wedding, and knew nothing of its having taken place until after they came, both were greatly disapointed, and poor Eddie was really grieved. Oh! I can never cease to regret his not haveing notice of it. Jim Titus, in his usual way, I fear was not punctual in sending the Dispatch. Eddie is very anxious to go over and see Helen but will not have time, goes to Tupelo with us tomorrow. Jake went visiting after dinner, has not returned yet. John & Decatur arrived from Tupelo this eve, after baggage, but we had sent it on in a Government Wagon. No late news from any point. I feel real unhappy about leaveing Bro. Will and the children, it will be so lonely - however the Children leave for their Grand Ma's Tuesday. Oh! God, have mercy on my Father and his household. Bless my dear Bro.
June, Monday 27, 1864
Hal and I did not get an early start, she and I came in the Ambulance with John to drive us. Decatur and Capt. Rodgers came in my Wagon, we had a very pleasant trip, arrived at Mrs. Sample's about 1 o'clock. She took us in, and we feel very fortunate in getting here, our room is very warm and disagreeable, but she is the nicest person about her household I ever saw, plenty to eat. We had a delightful time this evening, our friends came out from Tupelo to see us. Maj. Allison, Capt. Ewing, two Mr. Dunns, Thulus Beaumont & Jim Titus, we had a happy time, they all left before Tea. Bro. Geo. Tate, Nannie, Hal and I did not have a very lively time, it was entirely too warm, all came to our room early, and I feel that I will sufocate. Eddie and Jake have not arrived yet. Poor Mary and Bro. Will and the little boys I know are lonely tonight. God bless my poor old Father, My dear Bros, and oh! have mercy on our brave Soldiers - Crown them with Victory and give us peace -
June, Tuesday 28, 1864
Mrs. Sample, our hostess, had us up very early. Bro. Geo. went to Tupelo after breakfast, taking Robert with him, oh! the heat is almost intolerable. John came and brot Hal's and my bagage from Hd Qts. did not stay very long - Eddie and Jake Anderson arrived from Pontotoc before dinner, spent the day with us. I was never so warm and sleepy in my life as after dinner this day. Our friends from Tupelo came out early this evening - Mr. Galloway, John, Decatur, Bose Pugh, they left about sundown, Eddie and Jake went in also. Jim and Thulus Beaumont came out to Tea, we were haveing a nice time when Mrs. Sample sent for us to retire, this rather shocked us, but making the best of it, the boys in a laughing humor departed.
I am so undecided in my movements, Hal is flighty, never of the same mind two hours. God guide me in the right path. I know not today where tomorrow will be spent. Bless my Father, and Bros. Crown our Armys with Victory, oh! Give us success and peace -
June, Wednesday 29, 1864
Nannie and Mr. Pugh left for Aberdeen early this morning, Decatur came out, did not stay very long. Eddie and Jake spent the day with us again, the order for them to leave tomorrow has been countermanded, and they are all delighted, their horses are completely broken down since their march from Montivalo. Capt. Barber and Jack Doyle came to see us, we had a nice time. Hal's Bro. Frank spent the day with us also. Hal & I made a Soldier's shirt this morning - poor fellows I wish I could always have it in my power to gratify their wishes. It has been a terible warm day, and I have been unhappy, oh! so unhappy, so undecided about my movements. I believe Hal has concluded to stand still until the command is ordered to leave again. No news from home yet, Forrest has changed his plans for the present, of course we know nothing of their movements -
June, Thursday 30, 1864
Well, we have managed to exist through another terible warm day. Eddie and Jake spent the day with us again, Hal's Bro. Frank also. Gen. Forrest reviewed the Artilery this morning, we did not get to see them. Capt. - now Maj. Morton, and Lt. Blakemore called to see us. Bruce arrived today from the Army of Tenn. Gen. Johnston, he was slightly wounded and has a thirty days leave. Hal was delighted to see him, and saved a trip to the Army - as he will take Eddie's things to him. Robert went to Hd. Qts. with his Paper today. Hal and I took extra pains this evening in our dress but had no calls. We heard the sad fate of two of our friends in Henderson's Scouts, the Yankees hung them near Moscow, - Mr. Bonner and Lt. McConnell. Oh! this horible, horible war - our poor boys are looking for a battle every day, and expect to go in under the black Flag - Oh! heavenly Father we pray and beseech thee to hear our prayers - drive the enemy from our soile and give us peace -
July, Friday 1, 1864
It has been quite pleasant all day, a nice breeze, we spent it alone until this evening, several of our friends from Camp called, Col. Rucker, Col. Overton & Lt. Rodgers from Rucker's Brig, Capt. Leverson, Capt. Mason, Johnie and Decatur from Forrest's Hd. Qts. Maj. Crump arrived from Oxford, he left Helen at Mrs. Goodman's, she has a delightful home, and a nice horse to ride every evening - they all went back to Camp before night except Maj. Crump and John & Decatur, they staid until bed time. We had a delightful time, I am charmed with my new Bro. in law. Oh! my poor weary heart, how I long for some one to sympathize, to advise me, God have mercy. Bless my dear Father and protect his household, bless my dear Bros and Bros in law. I wrote to Shallie Kirk today, the 7th. Tenn and McDonald's Bat'n have orders to move on an hour's notice, the Yanks are very strong in numbers - but God will bless us and crown us with Victory, save our poor boys from privation and danger -
July, Saturday 2, 1864
We have spent a delightful day, Capt. Barber, Maj. Allen and Lt. Doyle spent the day with us. Robert went to Tupelo with his Papa. Hal's Bro. Frank was to see us. Mr. Pugh returned from his trip with Nannie, brought Mrs. Galloway and Miss Walington with him, he went on to Tupelo, Bruce went in the Ambulance with him. We had a gay time, Mrs. Galloway is as lively as can be. Mr. Galloway, Maj. Crump and Bro. Geo. came out in the Ambulance this evening from Tupelo - poor Maj. he is quite sad that his honeymoon should so early be blighted, however Man proposes, God disposes. No late war news, nor any from home - the Yanks are moveing slowly through the Country, rather shy of Mr. Forrest and his Company. I wonder when this horrible war will be over, if the scenes now passing will be remembered. I must cease for to Night, the Bats are so bad. Hal, Bettie and I have already had a race with one, and hard to say which is the greatest coward.
July, Sunday 3, 1864
This day will be long remembered. Bro. Geo. & Brodie went to Tupelo early. Hal, Tate and myself, with Bettie and the Children, started to Church at Tupelo in the Ambulance with Alfred to drive us. We got along very well until within a mile of Tupelo, had just passed through the Webfoot Cavalry Camp, saw them on parade and enjoyed the different scenes in Camp, reached the Creek, were undecided for some time whether to go over the bridge, or ford, the latter seemed best, so off we drove, and just entering the mud hole when the Ambulance upset, with a terible crash - in a few minutes fifty soldiers ran to our rescue, and a Mr. Harris (did not learn his title) who was exceedingly kind. I was first out, Alfred jumped out with Robert as the Ambulance fell, Bettie kept Mary close to her. Tate went on top of Hal, they were all very mudy, no limbs broken. We went on to Hd. Qrs. saw a great many friends, too late for Church, returned to dinner. Eddie and John Cummins spent day with us. Capt. Sheperd, Capt. Barber and Maj. Crump called this eve - we all went to Negro prayer meeting after tea.
July, Monday 4, 1864
Today is the Anniversary of the decleration of our forefather's independence, one year ago was a sad one for the happiness of our Southern Confederacy, -Vicksburgh surrendered by Pemberton to Grant. Many changes and sad days since that event, but thanks to a just and merciful God our hopes are brighter than at any time since we have been struggling for Independence. May the God of Battles defend our cause, protect our Armys from danger & disease, and crown them with glory and success. Tate, Hal, Mrs. Galloway, Miss Watlington & Mrs. Samples all spent the day at Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. Bettie, Mamie & Rob, of course, along. Maj. Leverson came for us, I do like him so much, he is so kind and attentive. We had a delightful day. Gen. Forrest & Lady very kind. We saw all of our friends, too numerous to name. Maj. Leverson brought us home this eve. Tate went riding on horseback with Bro. Brodie, we heard Ford Rodgers was not expected to live, Hal knows nothing of it, I pray it may be untrue. God bless my dear Father and Brothers. We spend the day in Tupelo again tomorrow -
July, Tuesday 5, 1864
Jake Anderson & Ebb Titus came by this morning - Col. Polk came out in Gen. Forrest's Ambulance for us to go in and spend the day with Maj. Leverson & Maj. Rambeaut. We had a delightful day, the Miss Skurlarks and Miss Bills, of Jackson, Tenn. were there, we played Cards, talked, and had a gay time. All of our friends nearly, we saw, ate dinner at three o'clock, and a more sumptuous fare I never saw grace a table. We all talked a while on the Porch after dinner, when our crowd came home to fix for a little dance, which we enjoyed very much, danced until two o'clock, and only got through with six setts. I played Euchre with Maj. Leverson, lost all except the last game, which I won him. We all like him very much. Gen. Forrest was opposed to the dance, so none of his crowd were there. Majs. Leverson and Rambeaut are splendid entertainers. I was shocked at the Miss Skurlarks deportments - Miss Clara Bills came home in the Ambulance with us. I never was so tired in my life, and the flees nearly divoured us. Mrs. Galloway would not go. My setts were danced as follows, 1st. Mr. Pugh, 2nd. Dr. Cowen, 3rd. Mr. Beaumont, 4 Maj. Rambeaut, 5th. Lt. Rodgers, 6th. Capt. Barber - the others, Maj. Leverson, Donelson, Rodgers, & Scruggs were not danced - too late.
July, Wednesday 6, 1864
Oh! I never was as sleepy in my life as this morning. Hal and Miss Clara ready for breakfast, I was not - went in after the rest had finished and got a Cup of Coffee. We all seemed dull and lazy this morning. John came in the Ambulance for Bro. George and Miss Billie to go to Tupelo, Dr. Cowen, Lt. Dunn, & Bro. called. Maj. Crump & Lt. Rodgers came also, did not stay long - Hal and I came upstairs as soon as we got dinner and went to sleep - just dresed in time - Eddie & Bruce came over. Decatur and Bruce went to Tupelo, Eddie went back to Camp at Verona. Lt. Rodgers came over after tea, they all have marching orders at 5 o'clock in the morning, do not know which way they are going, the Yankees are moveing out towards Ripley - God grant that our poor Soldiers may be spared, and crown the Southerners with glory and success. Save my poor Bro. oh! grant that he may nobly do his duty, but return safe. Bless my dear Father and his household. Hal is waiting for me to tell her fortune - everybody retired early tonight, disgusted with every enjoyment except the soft folds of the Arms of Morpheus. No late war news, Answer to flag of Truce from Memphis, Washburn still refuses to have any understanding with regard to the black flag -
July, Thursday 7, 1864
All up this morning to breakfast - a very warm day. Capt. Ferd Rodgers came this morning, we were delighted to see him, he is looking better than I ever saw him, although he is just recovering from a terible sickness. Maj. Rambeaut & Maj. Leverson also Bruce came out this morning to see us. Capt. Rodgers went into Tupelo with them. Tate cut out Maj. Leverson's shirts, so Hal and I missed our nap this eve and sewed on them. Tate is makeing Capt. Rodgers. Maj. Crump came over this morning, Robert went to Tupelo with him, they came back this evening. I received a letter from home and one from Helen, all well. Capt. Mason and Mr. Beaumont came out this eve. Tate and Mr. B. went riding on horseback, they staid until after Tea.
Our news from the Enemy is rather exciting, they are advancing in force, and our Armies are not many miles apart, the command is expecting orders every hour. God grant they may check the wicked foe, and drive them from our soile. Answer to flag of truce, no black flag, but as near to Christian warfare as is possible. Oh! God have mercy on our Army - crown them Victorious.
July, Friday 8, 1864
We all were at our work early this morning, and would have finished the shirts but had orders to move, Mr. Pugh came for us with two Ambulances and a baggage Wagon. We packed and were off in ten minutes time. Arrived in Tupelo at 1 o'clock, went to Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. every thing was in bustle, and hopeful in the comeing campaign. Met with Gen. Lee, who had just arrived on the cars, I am perfectly delighted with him, if I had a heart to lose, I think it would be in danger. God bless both of them, spare time to our Country, and crown them with Victory, in the battle which awaits them. We ate supper with Maj. Rambeaut, it was delightful. We spent a very pleasant evening. Maj. Leverson, Maj. Rambeaut, Mason, Beaumont and many other friends are as kind to us as Bros. We came up to Col. McCarty's, put the children to bed, our friends spent the evening. Maj. Crump and Eddie came to see us, we bid them all good bye, and will not see them again until after the battle. God grant they may all be spared. The Yanks are at Ripley, moveing down in force. We have no idea where the battle will be fought -
July, Saturday 9, 1864
Not much sleep did any of our room have last night - I did not close my eyes, the rest for only a few moments, between the flees and the bed bugs I spent a miserable night. Hal and I dressed long before day. Maj. Rambeaut, Capt. Mason & John came for us to go over for breakfast - we had a delightful Cup of Coffee, enjoyed our friends for a little while, then hurried on to the train. Met Mrs. Forrest, the Gen. and her two companions Miss Montgomery & Miss Grant. We did not get off for some time, Gen. Forrest had a fight with the Conductor before he would get off. Our trip was tedious, disagreeable and warm, the Children suffered with heat very much. Arrived in Columbus at 4 o'clock, stoped at City Hotel. Hal and I have a very pleasant room. Therese Blennerhassett came over and spent the evening with me. I was delighted to see her, oh! how many bright and happy recollections her presence recalls, yet alas, my poor weary heart, how sadly has life changed. Lt. Anderson came to see me this evening, brot the sad news of Lt. Lightner's death, also of Lee Elliotts being wounded, he is a Missourian.
July, Sunday 10, 1864
A long, long weary day this has been for our little party. I went over to see Therese directly after breakfast and staid until dinner time. We had a long talk, she is a sweet girl, and I believe a good friend of mine. I did not get to bid either Bro. Geo. or Bruce Good bye - Bro. G. left for the front to join Forrest, and Bruce has recovered from his wounds and gone to report to Johnston in Ga. Dispatches say the Yankees are in force in Pontotoc on yesterday, our boys will have some terible fighting. God grant they may be victorious, oh! heaven hear our prayers, spare our friends and Bros, and shield our Gens. from danger, drive our wicked, heartless enemies back to their own hearth stones, smile upon, and prosper and bless once more our Sunny land. We had a hard rain this eve, Tate went to Church. Therese came over - our land lord is a very pleasant gentleman, Mamie is sick, he came up and sit with us awhile. Hal & I sleep in Tate's room.
July, Monday 11, 1864
Tate, Hal and myself went over to see Therese and her Sister after breakfast, did not stay very long - just fixing for a nice, cool time when Miss Tabb, Miss Cannon and Sister, and Mr. Pugh called to see me. I was delighted with them, Miss Tabb in particular, they did not stay very long. We had some Candy made, Bettie went up to the Saloon and bought a large bowl of Ice cream which we enjoyed very much - had just fixed and begun my sewing when Mr. Sam Tate called, we all had to see him. After he left did not have time to fix again before dinner. Our land lord sent us up a nice julep before dinner. Therese came over and spent the evening with us, a very hard rain. Mr. Pugh called and brought me a beautiful Magnolia, with Miss Askew's compliments. Capt. Webb came for me to go to the Depot and assist in feeding the Soldiers of Neely Brigade, which are moveing from Ala. to Forrest's relief, only one Mobile Battery was there, which we fed, the rest will be here in the morning. A great many Ladies were ready, Therese & her Sister I went with -
July, Tuesday 12, 1864
A cloudy, gloomy morning. Therese came over early after breakfast for us to go with her to the Depot, and assist in feeding the Soldiers, Hal and Tate would not go. I went, Mr. Pugh walked with me, I promised him if he would be a good boy, I would speak well of him, he is by far, one of the kindest young men I ever met. It repaid us for all of our labor and fatigue to see how the poor Soldiers enjoyed the food, they had nothing to eat since breakfast yesterday morning, their horses were broken down, they had to take the train here, did not get off until 4 o'clock this eve, will have to fight as Infantry. Our troops have fallen back to Okolona, the Yanks were in 15 miles if them today. Our troops are confident of success, God grant they may be Victorious. Hal & I spent the evening with Therese - the Dr. McKim came to see Mamie, she is quite sick.
July, Wednesday 13, 1864
Mr. Pugh came round early this morning, we made arrangements to start for Nannie in the morning. Therese was to go with me. Capt. Tom Dashiell was to furnish the Ambulance - our trip had fully matured in preperations - but Tate gave up the idea, so our trip has fallen through. Capt. Dashiell came round after tea, will send his Ambulance early in the morning. Hal, Therese and I are going to spend the day with Bro. I wish we were all going out to stay, but little Mamie is too sick. No news from Forrest yet, we only know they are fighting. God grant they may be successful, and spare the lives of our dear Soldiers, protect my dear Bro. and friends from danger. Therese and Miss Wilkinson called this eve. Hal and I went to the Saloon and had a nice treat of Ice Cream, Robert was with us. Dixie prices are very high, but this rather startled us, $26. Mr. Pugh attends the weding tonight, Miss Cozart of this place, to Mr. Philips of Nashville.
July, Thursday 14, 1864
Hal, Therese and I got up very early and started for the Country, after running around, first on one road then another, we finally arrived at Waverly, just 7 miles above Columbus, although we had traveled ten or twelve miles. We crossed the Tombigbee, rode up to Mr. Young's, where he came out and insisted on our getting out, until he would send and try to find out where Bro. lived, failed however, but we spent the day. Fate, how strange, yet how delightful, they are a very wealthy family, a real Southern Mansion - his Daughters are very accomplished, and Miss Lou is a beautiful girl - such delightful Music, and an elegant dinner, our first peaches and milk. We went to the Pond late this evening, to try to learn to swim. Hal would not venture, Therese and I tried it. I did not have any confidence in myself, therefore did not make much improvement. Therese was more successful. We had a delightful drive home, found Mamie well, and good news from Forrest.
July, Friday 15, 1864
Our dispatches from the front are very encouraging - Forrest is fighting the Enemy near Tupelo - nothing decisive, but we have repulsed them in every attempt to fight us. God grant our Army may be crowned with glory and success - protect my dear Bro. and friends from all danger. The news from Virginia is glorious, God grant it may be true, our forces in three miles of Washington City, and shelling the City. Oh heaven, smile upon our poor, desolated South, brighten the hearthstones of our sad and lonely homes - drive our enemy back, take them in peace, we do not wish them any harm, but oh! grant our Sunny land Victory and peace, bless my dear old Father and spare him to us, for the days when our dear boys will once more bless our homes with their presence. After tea, all sitting in our Room, Mr. Crump sent Dis. “Yankees whipped & making for Ripley & Forest after them” - thank God for this. Letter from home, poor Nannie Fletcher dead -
Therese and several ladies called.
July, Saturday 16, 1864
Today Hal, Tate and myself set apart for returning our visits. Capt. Dashiell kindly sent his Rockaway. Therese and Miss Helen Goff came to see us, we started calling just at 11 o'clock - to see Mrs. Forrest first, she had just received a Dispatch from the Gen. he was slightly wounded in the foot. We have the advantage, the enemy in full retreat, but our victory not as yet decidedly great. We returned all calls. Bro. came and spent the evening with us - Nannie and Dashiell came down from Aberdeen. Dashiell's wound looks very badly and I fear if he is not very prudent, he will be very unfortunate yet. Mr. Pugh and I went out calling this eve, Dashiell, Tate, Nannie, Hal & I went over to see Therese and her Sister after Tea. Oh! such a terible warm night I never experienced. Nannie staid in the room with Tate. Hal & I tried our room for the first time, I am almost sufocated with the heat -
July, Sunday 17, 1864
All ready for breakfast, one of the warmest mornings we have had. Therese came over after breakfast to see if some of us would not go to Artesia on the train, to assist in attending to the wounded Soldiers. I fixed up my baskett, went by for Therese & her Sister, we met the other Ladies at the Depot, arrived at Artesia, did not wait long for the train, first two were loaded with Soldiers going to Demopolis to relieve Talagega of the raid not threatening it. Next two trains were loaded with our wounded, and oh! my heart ached to see so much suffering, we soothed and gave them every thing they wanted, returned to Columbus on the eve train. Col. Crosslin of 7th. Ky was aboard, destined for Columbus, badly wounded. We had a very disagreeable, warm trip, but a consolation in knowing we had soothed our suffering Soldiers. Saw Capt. Mason at Artesia, was delighted of course, spent the evening, took tea with Mollie Tabb, met my old friend Mollie at Artesia, Therese, Mr. Berry & Lt. Watts called to see us. Bro. George came today - Dashiell improving -
July, Monday 18, 1864
I was very unhappy about no conveyance to go out to Bro's, sitting in the Parlor after breakfast, when our new made friend Mrs. Reynolds came in for Hal, Therese and myself to go out and spend a few days with her - I accepted, Hal, after we came to our room, did not seem to like it, though I had no idea of anything of the kind when in Mrs. R. company. Tate and Nannie both seemed distressed at Hal's departure - censured me for accepting the invitation. I can have no happiness, it seems, without so much unhappiness.
We arrived at Col. Young's about 11 o'c. Miss Lou, who is one of the sweetest ladies I ever met, Miss Paine and Col. Young greeted us cordially, and a happy day the rest was to me, Late in the evening we all went down to the Pond, went in bathing, and had a gay time, though some redicilous scenes among the beginers. Therese has more confidence than Hal or I, therefore gets along better. I must confess I am really a coward in Water -
July, Tuesday 19, 1864
A bright and beautiful morning - my heart seems as light and happy as the sunshine is lovely. I am perfectly in love with this charming family. Mrs. Reynolds is so warm hearted and good, though our acquaintance has been so short, it seems we have always been friends, and Miss Lou, ah! how can I express the admiration I have for her, how beautiful, how lovely she is. I have never, since the days of my childhood, met with any Ladie I am so completely in love with - how my heart aches for a friend, just as Miss Lou is - if I only could gain her confidence. There is something about her that reminds me of my dear, dear Mother. We have spent a delightful day. Mrs. James Young called to see us, she sings exquisitely. Mrs. Judivron called also. We all went bathing again. Therese progresses rapidly, though Hal and I are still great cowards. Lou and I had a game of Chess after tea. I cannot but be unhappy about not being at Bro. I know I will be censured by all parties -
July, Wednesday 20, 1864
Another happy and beautiful morning. Miss Lou gave me some Cotton to knit Eddie a pr of socks. I began them, but did not get much done, most of the time playing Bagammon, Chess, or having some Music, learned Miss L. two pieces, “Brightest Eyes Quick Step,” “Rosebud Waltz,” she was very apt, but I fear her swimming scholar will ever be a drag to the art.
Our days are as happy as can be, her Bro. Lt. Watt Young came today on short leave, he is rather shy of Ladies, therefore we have not seen much of him. All went to the Pond again, Hal was sick, and could not go in. I believe I am a greater coward every time I attempt it. Therese is still gaining confidence, and improving. Mrs. Tom Young and Mrs. King came round to see us after tea, we had a very happy evening. Hal and I did not agree very well - I bet I would finish my sock, she bet I would not, so she put the Gas out. I lit it again and finished my sock.
July Thursday 21, 1864
Still my happiness continues, I do dearly love Miss Lou and Mrs. Reynolds both. Mrs. Hamilton, their Sister, invited us to Tea, we accepted, spent the day so happy - all retired after dinner for a rest, got up early, prepared for the pond. Mrs. Reynolds and Hal did not go in, it was so much like rain. Lou, Therese and I tried it. Therese got along charmingly - I, poor me, I am a greater fool than ever. A shower came up, so we had to hasten our pleasure - began preperations for our visit as soon as we reached the house. We all five went in the Cariage, I never have spent a more pleasant evening, the Supper was Magnificent - everything passed off so well. I have fallen in love with Mrs. Hamilton, she is almost as sweet as Lou. There is something I cannot resist in watching dear Lou, she is more like my Mother each day that I am with her. We staid until 12 o'clock, a beautiful moonlight night. Lt. Watts rode home with us - Gen. Johnston has been superseded by Hood, the latter haveing orders to fight immediately.
July, Friday 22, 1864
We all were ready for Columbus quite late, rather late in our breakfast after last night's dissipation. I was really sad at leaveing, so much happiness for my lonely life crowded into one short week. Met Col. Porter of Gen. Cheatam's Staff at breakfast. We did not tarry long after our meal was finished, had a very dusty, disagreeable, warm ride to Columbus, and my heart was indeed sad to part with dear “waverly” - Lou came in with us, oh! that dear, sweet girl, I do dearly love her. Therese alighted first - we then came to the Hotel. Lou came and sat with us a while, I gave her my Photograph Album. Telegrams - Hood has fought and whiped Sherman - Grant has at last been relieved of his command, by the interposition of our divine Father. Flags all at half mast over the eventful news. God in his Wisdom will do all well. Went walking this eve with Therese and Lucy Harris. Company after Tea, and sat up very late. I am so unhappy - and no one to confide, oh! God, have mercy -
July, Saturday 23, 1864
I was never so sleepy as when awakened this morning, after breakfast got my sock and knot all morning. Maj. Rambeaut and Mr. Pugh came up in Tate's room and sat. Cousin Frazor came for a while. The news this morning is glorious, Hood has attacked Sherman, and driven his force across the River, with heavy loss on Yankee side. Hardee is the rear, and will give them a warm reception. Did not get the evening Telegrams before leaving Columbus. Bro, Kate, and Nannie came in, I returned with Bro. I am perfectly unhappy at the way in which Hal has treated me. I have no plans, nor no idea when I will see one of them again. God be with me and guide me to do what is right. Therese & Capt. Triplett called this eve, Col. Laynard also, Decatur arrived. Nothing reliable as to Grant's death. Bro, Kate and I had a very pleasant ride out. Sister Amirilla and all the Children glad to see me, all sat up late. Mrs. Smith and I occupy the same room. I am so undecided and unhappy. May God give us Victory, spare so much bloodshed, and give us peace.
July, Sunday 24, 1864
We all slept very late this morning, Bro. sent to Columbus for the news, boy did not get back until after dinner, then had no news. A note from Bro. Geo. saying he and his crowd would leave for Libby in the morning - nothing over the wires since we left yesterday evening. A note from Therese, she is anxious I should come in, & make another visit to Waverly. I am as unhappy as mortal can be at the manner in which Hal has treated me. I have no idea where or what will be my movements, I have no idea they will be to satisfy anyone else, but pray God may guide me right, and bless and brighten my sad path -
Mrs. Smith, Sister Amirilla, Bro and myself with the Children have spent the day quite pleasantly, sat up late after Tea. Mrs. Smith and I are still room mates - Sam is improveing very slowly, poor little fellow, he looks dreadfully -
July, Monday 25, 1864
How very cold it was this morning, We must have had a great Victory in Ga. as this cool weather always indicates a great Southern Victory. No news over the wires again today, it seems strange, but God grant we may be victorious. Our Enemy have every advantage, yet in the God of battles we out our trust, and have faith that all will be well. Mrs. Smith returned to Aberdeen this morning. Sister Amirilla and I spent the day mostly alone, Bro. was off on the farm. I did not quite finish my Sock, had a good nap after dinner. Eddie arrived this evening from Gen. Chalmers Hd. Qts. - no news from Ga. or Va. yet. Eddie is right sick, has not been well since the fight. We all retired early. Katie is going to sleep with me, Rachel will make her pallet in here also. I am the greatest coward in the world. Still undecided in my movements, I reckon Hal & her crowd are happy tonight. May God soften my heart, I cannot but feel bitter, oh! guide and give me strength to bear my unhappy fate -
July, Tuesday 26, 1864
Ah! sad and lonely days, are these now passing. Eddie went to Columbus this morning, returned this evening, brot news of 25th. from Ga. the Yanks were shelling Atlanta, nothing decisive as to the fate of either Army in that State - Hood gave them a bad thrashing, but from Telegrams since, I fear our Victories cannot be followed up. God grant we may be blessed with glorious news from them in a day or two - nothing important from other points. Tate and her crowd did not leave Columbus until today. Robert was sick yesterday and they could not leave. I heard through Therese from them, they spent last eve at Mrs. Weaver's. I am so unhappy, I don't know what to do, whether to go on home, or not, - oh! my heavenly redeemer, guide me, teach my heart forbearance, and for pity lighten my trials.
I finished one of Eddie's socks today, had a long nap this eve, consequently am not sleepy tonight, recieved letters from Capt. Barber and Shallie Kirk. We all sat up late - oh! heaven have mercy, I am so unhappy.
July, Wednesday 27, 1864
We all got up very early this morning - Bro. Eddie had to go to Columbus, Eddie arrived in time for the train, and left for Okolona. Bro. came back quite late this evening, bro't no reliable news, from any point. Yanks still shelling Atlanta, the raide seems now to be pressing Jackson, Miss. instead of our front, those on the Charleston R. R. seem to be resting on their cares, wacthing, and guided by movements in Ga. God grant their plans may be frustrated, and our arms Victorious. Cousin Frazor arrived today and has been quite sick all evening. I am as unhappy as mortal can be. Bro. opposes my going for some time. I have my plans made, however, and have no idea of changeing them. I have had so much to try me, I have no patience to argue the question, and trust there will be no more unpleasantrys with regard to it. Oh! God give me strength, give me strength to bear up. -
July, Thursday 28, 1864
Another long, long weary day. I have been knitting very hard, to try and keep down my miserable feelings. Rachel very kindly offered to clean my head nicely - I accepted, so tonight I have one consolation, a nice, clean head. Nothing important has passed today, neither have we heard one word of news. Oh! it would kill me to live in the Country - Bro. was very angry with me this evening because I would not consent to remain. I of course did not agree to any such arrangement. I am dependent on him however, for a conveyance to Columbus, and he cannot take me before Sunday. God grant me contentment until then. I am going in opposition to my realtive's advice. My life has not been one to make me bound by affection to obey. I cannot live thus - I am going, I know not when. Oh! God guide and protect me - I will do my duty to myself, though the world condemn me -
July, Friday 29, 1864
I think without doubt, this is the warmest day I ever experienced, knit all day, finished Eddie's socks, and Amanda washed them out for me, just finished them in time, Eddie arrived from Columbus this eve, spent yesterday and part of today with Tate and the girls at Tibbee. They sent me no messages or regrets that I was not with them. I hope it will all be right - God be with and guide me. No late news from either Army, Va. or Ga. news of Kirby Smith's crossing the River from Trans Mississippi to this Department. God is with us, and the light of independence now glimmering in the distance will soon burst forth with a halo of unfading light and glory.
Sam was not so well, sent for Dr. Brice, he came, bro't his daughter, Kate Brice, who is my room mate for tonight. Eddie, Brother and all of us sat up quite late talking - my dear Brothers how dearly I love them. God grant we may all be spared to meet once more around the hearthstone of dear old Father - God bless and protect him -
July, Saturday 30, 1864
Bro. and Eddie were undecided for some time this morning whether or not I should return to Columbus. Eddie at last consented to bring me in. We had a warm, disagreeable ride, found Therese at home and glad to see me. Eddie came round after dinner, and sat with Therese and I some time, poor Eddie, I was so grieved to bid him good-bye, hope to meet him before he leaves for Camp. Lou Young came round to see us, invited us home with her, which I of course did not refuse, Therese also - We had a nice ride out - Dr. Butts came with us - her Bro. Willie at home, we had a game of grab, did not last long. We then went down to the pond, and had a nice bath. I still have a great horror of the water.
No late news from the Army today - none from my friends at Tibby - I am really sad at parting from my Brothers - oh! heaven guide me, and protect me from harm. Lou, Therese and I are room mates tonight -
July, Sunday 31, 1864
This morning has been spent very quietly, Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, - Lou's sister, and her husband, - were here. Mrs. H. invited us when she left to visit her bath this evening, owing to our religious scruples not allowing us to go in the fish pond. The rain however interfered with our plans. In the afternoon, Lou, Miss Mary Lou and I occupying one bed in our room while Mrs. Reynolds and Therese had the other. I was the only one who succeeded in “making the trip,” we started on - the others finding it impossible, for which non compliance of orders on their part I fully made up until I was awakened by the thunder not only in the Heavens, but in the bed beside me. We were interrupted in the midst of a highly intellectual conversation by the arrival of Miss Harris, Mrs. Martin and Mrs. Johnston, we dressed, spent a quiet evening and retired.
August, Monday 1, 1864
My Dear Belle
It has been such an “egrejus” long time since I saw you last, that I'm quite at a loss how to commence the many long yarns I have in store for you, but as it's utterly impossible for me to communicate with you in any other manner than this, I must e'en put up with it - and narrate them as “gay and festive” as possible - but as I have been so very slow in writing this far, and it “waxes late” I will be compeled to leave for my next what I have so auspiciously begun in this - And although it is of the greatest importance that you hear what I have to say now, I will pleasantly forbear and bid you my “gentle and puserlanermus cuss” a fond adeu -
Miss Belle Edmondson - a kiss
August, Wednesday 3, 1864
Third anniversary of my beloved Mother's death - There are few more sorrowful times, in the experience of poor Children of earth - than round the deathbed of a loved and revered Mother - one who has been indeed a true faithful Mother, whose life to us has consecrated the name - and left it on our hearts as a holy word -
August, Friday 5, 1864
Our gay little crowd was broken up this morning - Therese, Mrs. Martin both returned to Columbus, Mrs. Johnston went in with them to bring Mrs. Forrest out to spend a few days - they have not returned, but from a heavy cloud which passed over this eve, and from all appearances was inclined to moisten mother earth about that point, we all would feel uneasy, that is our only consolation. So we, a sleepy crowd, retire early, with the hopes of greeting them in the morning. Lou, Mary Poullaim, Mr. Will Young and I spent the evening together in the parlor, they knitting, he and I playing baggammon. All together we have had a delightful day. Lou and Mrs. Reynolds had company, Mary Lou and I had a nap - then a nice bath - not much swiming. Lou sat on the bank, much amused at our fear of a ducking - her country relations called and she could not venture in - I have decided to not leave until I hear from Tate.
August, Saturday 6, 1864
We were all very uneasy all morning about Mrs. Johnson, the old driver arrived at 12 o'c with the news of trouble for them on yesterday evening. Mrs. Forrest's girl was very sick, she could not come. Mrs. Johnson started out rather late, the heavy storm which we thought would disturb the quiet of Columbus overtook her, three miles from Columbus, in this deep trouble the Carriage broke down, so she had to return to the City, had a terible time. No limbs or loves lost however. Lou, Mrs. Reynolds, Mary Poullaim and I had a nice quiet day. Col. Young went to Columbus, left Mr. Will Y. to attend to the Mill, so we did not have much of his delightful company. Mrs. Johnson and Dr. Butts arrived with bad news from Mobile, the Yankee fleet passed Forts Morgan & Gaines with loss of only one boat, the Tecumseh. God grant the City may be saved.
August, Sunday 7, 1864
A bright and beautiful day - no Church going from this establishment - we all spent the day at home, hoping and praying for the gloom which hovers over us to be dispelled, for the safety and success of our defences of Mobile, the defeat of the raids which are overrunning our poor desolated land. Give our Armies success, and oh, grant us peace. No later news from Mobile, or any other point. I received a letter from Hal, no news in it, am looking for her in a few days. Lou, and all of us slept all afternoon, I suffered very much with my ear all night, did not sleep much and fear I am a great deal of trouble to dear, sweet Lou -
August, Monday 8, 1864
Day spent in kniting, Chas. D. C. - [illegible]
I slept very little last night, and to my distress kept the other Ladies awake - poor Lou, the task fell to her to go down stairs for Laudanum, she is one of the sweetest girls I ever met, I love her with my heart's warmest affection.
Mrs. Hamilton was down to Tea, we spent a pleasant evening. My deafness is very disagreeable to myslef, and I suppose to every one else, having to enquire so often when addressed.
The news from all points is not as encouraging as we hoped for - Mobile is teribly threatened. God grant our Armies may be successful in defence of the City -
August, Tuesday 9, 1864
I heard this morning the sad news of poor Lt. W. Tabb's death, he was killed in Ga. in last Saturday's fight, in defence of Atlanta - how many desolated hearth stones, how long, oh! Lord, how long must we suffer.
Nothing of importance haveing transpired today, I will not continue the light, only to record my weary heart aches.
Miss Judiron & Dr. Judiron called this evening, I excused myself on account of deafness. Mrs. Young (Em) came, she came in the room where I was, and we had a nice little chat - enjoyed her delightful Singing after Tea. Mr. Jim Young gave us some of Artemis' best, of course much laughter and enjoyment by all -
August, Wednesday 10, 1864
Still no decisive news from any point except the Surrender of Fort Gaines, this is a heavy blow, yet Morgan still stands to dispute their quiet entrance into the Bay. I am still as hopeful as can of Mobile, they are now 30 miles below in the Bay, with every obstruction to impede their reaching the City. May the God of battles defend us from any further invasion, by so wicked and sinful enemies as we have to contend with -
Mrs. Hamilton spent the day with us today, I could not have been much pleasure to her or anyone else, as 'tis no company for myself to suffer for so many nights with earaches, then left deff - I am afraid to go in the bath, as my country relations may be offended and depart. Lou & I against Mrs. Reynolds and Mr. Will Young had a nice game of cards after Tea.
August, Thursday 11, 1864
The cry is still no news from Va. Ga. or Mobile - all still holding their own, but no advance from either side. Gen. Dick Taylor has crossed the Mississippi with a heavy force. Forrest sent a great many Wagons to meet him, two Bateries to protect his march until they can form a junction. The Yanks are still advancing at Oxford, last accounts. Gen. Chalmers fought them at Abbeville, fell back, our forces under Gen. Forrest are at Lafayette Springs. The Yanks are in large numbers, yet we are confident of checking their wicked course before they go much farther. A rumor that Gen. Lee had been sent to Ga. while our President was left in command of Va. A nice game of cards after Tea, Lou and I were teribly beaten.
August, Saturday 13, 1864
[First part of this entry is in a different handwriting]
The sun shone about as usual, the birds sang gaily, I suppose, tho' I didn't listen - a gentle breeze was stirring - entirely too gently for the temperature of the day. In fact the whole face of “nature” displayed nothing more than a hot August day. I have managed to love through it by “dint of a squeeze” - I ate breakfast, dinner & supper, knit socks, played backgammon & cards - (at all of which I am a proficient - ) pinched, beat, battered and bruised all of the white inhabitants - had my game ear looked into by a Confederate Surgeon. I was dressed in my usual “flowery stile” at that time of day. I took a bath, but failed to get drowned - by reason of over caution - got “egregriously” beaten at Euchre & went to bed in a sprightly state of mind.
Tate, and the girls, have returned to Columbus, a note from Tate today, telling me to report to Hd. Qts. - they will return home in a few days.
Lou, like a good child, wrote the first of today.
August, Sunday 14, 1864
A bright and beautiful day - I did not come to Columbus this morning - Mrs. Johnson & Mary Poullium came in to Church, brot me a note from Tate saying she would send Johnie out for me this eve. Lou and I spent the morning alone, in the octagon. Mrs. Reynolds writing to Maj. Reynolds, Mr. Willie Young making preperations to depart for Forrest's command. We had all just gone to our rooms, and ready for a nap, when Johnie came. I concluded to come in and make arrangements with Tate what to do. John & I had a delightful drive in -
Mary and Robert both look badly, met Mr. Holmes just from home, left all well - Great deal of sickness in Memphis - Tate and the girls go to Macon on the train tomorrow morning - I have concluded to stay with Lou Young, will return tomorrow. I am almost crazy with my ear tonight - Parlor full of company, I excused myself - and of all the miserable places, I have landed in it tonight. Hal, Nannie & I all in one bed, and the warmest night imagineable -
August, Monday 15, 1864
Tate, Nannie and Hal, with the rest of their crowd, left for Macon on the 9 o'clock train. I left the Hotel after their departure and went over to Mrs. Long's to spend the day with Therese. My ear pained me teribly all day, I felt very badly after Tate left, but she promised to Telegraph me if they moved. Col. Young sent for me about two, o'clock. I had a lonely ride, met Duke about half way, he arrived safe with my trunk. Lou met me and I was really happy to be with her again. We all went to bathe as soon as I arrived, Judge Clayton came out, brot me a telegram from Tate telling me to come to Macon immediately, they leave tomorrow for Grenada.
I am almost crazy with my ear, so Col. Young Dispatched “Not well enough to travel.” I am suffering so much, no sleep for me tonight.
August, Thursday 25, 1864
After my failure to remodel Lou's hat on yesterday, Mrs. Johnson kindly offered to assist me, so she spent the morning making the crown. I then took it, finished puting it together, and trimed it, after finishing it looked quite nice - and Lou did not make so much sport over her milliner's misfortunes. I finished Maj. Young's socks, with Lou's assistance, we played backgammon, and altogether had a very pleasant day. Mary Poullaim and I improved very much in our swimming. Col. Young got back today from his Plantation, and is quite sick tonight from fatigue.
Bad news from Va. and Mobile, Fort Morgan surrendered and we have been defeated at Fredericksburg. God grant the days may brighten for our poor bleeding Confederacy. No news from home yet -
August, Friday 26, 1864
I had a regular seige today with Mrs. Reynolds hat, and did not finish it. Mrs. Johnson and I both failed to make a brim, I retreated to my room in disgust, the other girls were all enjoying a nice nap. We all went to bath, Mary Lou and I improved very much in swiming, not able to swim across the Pond yet. As usual, we played Euchre after Tea. Lou and I were beaten only one game - No news of importance from the Armys -
August, Saturday 27, 1864
I began on the hat immediately after breakfast, succeeded in forming a very nice brim, and Mrs. Reynolds was pleased, I do not think I was cut out for a Miliner or hat maker. Poor Lou, is loosing all her hair, and it really distresses me, I wish I could remedy the evil. We all went to bathe, I improved a little in swiming, not confidence enough yet. Mr. Clapp and Mr. Chambers arrived at Waverly this evening - Lou and I played against Mrs. Reynolds and Mr. Clapp at Whist - spent a very pleasant eve, returned early, and I venture to say Lou and I will enjoy it, as we did not sleep any last night for the Musquitoes
August, Sunday 28, 1864
Lou and I as usual too late for breakfast, We all spent most of the morning in the Octagon - Mr. Clapp and Col. Chambers making themselves very entertaining - I do like Mr. Clapp so much -
Lou and I came up stairs, Lou occupied her time in writing to her Bro. Vallie - I of course in sleeping -
We had rather a discussion at dinner about Southern people taking the Oath of Allegiance to the Yankee Gov. Mr. Clapp had the advantage of the discussion, his view being strictly against it. The gentleman returned to Columbus after dinner, we spent the evening in slumber. Mr. & Mrs. Hamilton took Tea, and spent the evening with us. I do feel so uneasy about home, no news decisive from any portion of our Armyies
August, Monday 29, 1864
The day passed as usual - Waverly is always pleasant to me. Spent the day in Kniting, backgammon, sleeping &c. We had a delightful time in the Pond, have not succeeded in swiming across yet. Good news from Va. today - Lee has had a great Victory, capturing 2,000 Yanks, killing and wounding large numbers - Report of the Siege of Petersburg being abandoned for the present. Nothing later from Mobile, Forrest or Ga. Lincoln is trying to arrange to send peace delegates, only for policy in the next election, of course we can never agree with him in our terms of peace.
No news from home - had a nice game of Euchre after tea. Lou, dear girl, I cannot but love you too well -
August, Tuesday 30, 1864
Mrs. Reynolds and Mrs. Johnson went to Columbus this morning, Col. Young also. Lou, Mary L. and I had quite a nice time although alone. The Miss's Burt called. Mr. Clapp came out with Col. Young on his way to Holly Springs. We all had a short bath this eve, as the Gentleman wanted to go in. Mrs. Young and Maj. Henderson took Tea, and we all spent a very pleasant eve. I sat up very late writing to Capt. Henderson -
No news from any portion of the Country -
August, Wednesday 31, 1864
After all my sitting up so late, Mr. Clapp went off and forgot my letter, or at least, I failed to awake in time to give it to him.
We have had a pleasant day, as usual, to me each day is delightful at Waverly - there is not much variety, but 'tis always pleasant - We all together had a nice bath, although 'twas very cold. I was really timid and foolish in the Water, tried to cross, but did not get more than half way, hope I will succeed some time.
Still no news from home, and nothing different from the Army's -
September, Thursday 1, 1864
Today is the first of Autumn - No falling leaves or withering buds greet us - all is sunshine and happiness - fruit in abundance, and our bath as delightful as in Summer time. Mary Lou has more confidence in swimming, yet I can go farther - Poor Lou's relations were with her, and she could not indulge. We all enjoy life at Waverly, more than any place I have chanced to meet since the War. Gen. Cheatam's Orderly came today for the horses, the Maj. & Gov. have gone, so no more horse back pleasures for Lou & I. Forrest has completely rid the Country above of Yanks, all bright in his Camp, nothing deffinite from Va. Ga. or Mobile. Lou and I redeemed our character tonight, in opposition to Mrs. Reynolds and Mary Lou -
September, Friday 2, 1864
Today has been one of the warmest I ever experienced - Lou and I buisy sewing on her dress - I finished the waiste, Lizzie the skirt and I think we will finish it tomorrow -
No news from any point today - Mary Lou joined Lou to entertain relations, Mrs. Reynolds & Mrs. Johnson went to Mrs. Hamilton's, so Mrs. Young and I had the Pond to ourselves and the water was delightful after this warm day. Lou & I beat again at Cards -
10 o'clock at night - still suffocating. I don't know how we shall manage to get through the night.
September, Saturday 3, 1864
Oh misery how warm it has been - heard this morning at the breakfast Table Gen'l Chalmers with his command would be at West Point today, and have watched eagerly to hear news from home, as Maj. Crump is with him, but alas have been sadly disapointed. I am very sad never to hear one word, it does seem they might find some way to send me word - Lou and I with Lizzie's assistance finished Lou's dress, and it fits really nice, and I am thankful.
Mrs. McGavrock and Mrs. Hamilton called this morning. We all had a delightful bath, after the scorching heat. Lou and I beat Mrs. Reynolds & Mary Lou badly at Cards. Mr. Chambers sent the Ladies two latest novels, in which we all expect a great treat - Joseph 2d Court - Ladie Audlie's Secret -
September, Sunday 4, 1864
Another warm day and much excitement in our family, for sympathy with a neighbor and friend whose only son was wounded at Atlanta, and after four week's suffering, this morning had his leg amputated, reaction has barely taken place, and very little hopes of his life. Lou is much distressed, and her exclamations of sympathy for poor Billy Burt weigh heavily on my spirits, although I am not acquainted with the young man. Mrs. Hamilton received a note from her husband at West Point, he had seen Eddie and Maj. Crump, said Eddie would be over today, but alas, I was sadly disapointed. No news from home yet - Maj. Cheatham arrived from Atlanta today, seems very hopeful. God grant our Armies may be victorious.
September, Monday 5, 1864
I cut my foullard Silk and we have all been buisy sewing on it all day, Lou the skirt, Ellen (Lou P. maid) the flounce, Mrs. Reynolds and Mary Lou the Rosettes and I finished the waiste, we did not half finish the dress. Lou, Mary Lou & I went in the Pond early, I swam across with Lou's assistance, and got a terible ducking at floating - Heard from West Point, Eddie and Maj. Crump will be down tomorrow. Maj. Cheatham & Mary Lou played against Lou and I and we beat them badly. Mrs. Johnson & Hamilton went to sit up with Billy Burt, who I am happy to say is much better, received a letter from Maj. Price & Therese Blennerhassett -
September, Tuesday 6, 1864
Maj. Crump, Eddie and Capt. Daly, in company with Gen. Chalmers and Staff came down from Tupelo West Point, all stoped at Mrs. Jim Young's to tea, the first named came down here after tea - we all sat up very late, and spent a very pleasant evening
September, Wednesday 7, 1864
Our friends remained with us over to day, and we have had a very pleasant day - playing cards, backgammon, Chess, Music &c - All walked down to the pond this eve, of course did not go in bathing as the gentleman were with us - We have all had some grand mistakes, if this horrid war lasts much longer we will all be so demoralized we cannot entertain Gentleman, so accustomed we are to speaking free to each other -
September, Thursday 8, 1864
Maj. C. Capt. D. and Eddie all left after breakfast for West Point.
We have had comparatively a quiet day. No news of importance from any point.
September, Friday 9, 1864
Very cool and delightful - I finished my foullard Silk - if the weather improves as fast as it has done for the last few days, I think I will soon be left high and dry in my white dresses.
We had a call from some young Ladies of Columbus, Miss Jennie Ebert, Misses Williams, Capt. Martin and our little friend Therese. No news with them, nor have we heard any of importance today. Lou, Mary Lou & I called on Mrs. Young this evening - We had a game of Cards, Lou and I were not so fortunate, Maj. Cheatham & Mary Lou ran very evenly with us -
September, Saturday 10, 1864
Today has been rather warm, and very idly spent by me. We have played Cards or backgammon most of the time. Lou and I beat Mrs. Reynolds and Maj. Cheatham badly after Tea. No news today, and nothing to write in my Diary - Of course 'tis always pleasant to me, I have always been happy since my stay at Waverly.
September, Sunday 11, 1864
Mrs. Johnson, Mary Lou, Maj. Cheatham and Woodie went to Church, Lou, Mrs. Reynolds & I spent the morning reading, &c - All slept in the afternoon. Mr. Clapp & Lucas arrived from Holly Spring, found his Wife doing her own work. The Yanks made a complete wreck of every thing in their last raide. Lou, Mary Lou & I went up to Mr. Hamilton's after tea - had a very pleasant evening, and beautiful moonlight walk -
September, Monday 12, 1864
Lou and I went up to see little Willie Young, he was better but quite sick last night. Mrs. Young came home with us, and brought him.
I sewed some on Mrs. Reynolds dress, have spent the day quite pleasantly, and had a delightful bath in the pond. Maj. Crump arrived just as we finished tea, and of course I have had a delightful evening. Lou and I beat Mary Lou & Maj. Cheatham badly at Cards, Mrs. R. and Maj. Crump played chess -
September, Tuesday 13, 1864
Maj. Crump, Maj. Cheatham, Mrs. Reynolds, Lou, Mary Lou & I have spent a very pleasant day. Eddie arrived from West Point this morning - Lou made him a beautiful Tobacco bag, Mary Lou made Maj. Crump one. We all went in bathing, I swam across the Pond for the first time. Lou and I beat Eddie & Mary Lou at Cards - Mrs. Reynolds & Maj. Crump played backgammon. We sat up right late. I received a letter from Bro. Will asking me to come and stay with Mary & the Children until he returned, & of course will go, but have made no arrangements as yet -
September, Wednesday 14, 1864
Today has been a sad one to many members of this household, or rather has terminated sadly to some. Maj. Crump and Eddie left this morning for Grenada, where Gen. Chalmers' command has been ordered - I am so unhappy tonight, my heart aches to see dear Lou in trouble. She had a long letter from Miss Sallie Sanders giving a rememberance of her Sister Prudie's last illness - Lou's dearest friend. I did not know her, but ah! Lou, my heart's deepest sympathy is yours. Maj. Cheatham received a letter from Ga. bearing news of the death of one of his dearest friends, he left after tea - so we all came to our room. Lou, Sallie & Mary Lou all reading - oh! my poor weary heart, when, when will it be at rest -
September, Thursday 15, 1864
Today had been quite cool, and we have spent it very quietly sewing all morning. After dinner Lou and I beat Maj. Cheatham badly at cards &c after Tea. we had a nice time in the Pond, but cold weather is fast approaching, I am very much afraid I will be left in my white dresses out of season -
I received a long, nice letter from Capt. Henderson tonight, accompanying a Chicago Times, he gave me all the news, and I shall ever feel grateful for his kind rememberance on leaving with Forrest, with 40 of his best men for Sherman's rear. God grant some bright spot may cheer us from that brave little band -
September, Friday 16, 1864
Autumn is fast approaching, today has been quite cool - We have spent the day as usual delightfully at Waverly. Cards being order of the day - A delightful bath, though rather cool - I made Maj. Cheatham a nice Chess bag.
September, Saturday 17, 1864
Another cool day, spent very idly by all, playing cards most of the day - this evening Mary Lou, Mrs. James Young and I went in the Pond alone, Lou sitting on the bank looking on. Both my friends had gone out, I alone in, when a Company of Soldiers passed. I am sorry to say our Confederate Soldiers would so far forget themselves as to notice a Ladie in bathing, but more so to say those stoped and made several remarks loud enough to be heard. I was not uneasy, knowing the Officers would keep them straight.
Lou and I are going to take a dose of Medicine, as we are very much in Job's fix -
September, Sunday 18, 1864
All went to Church his morning except Lou, Mary Lou and I, we had a nice, quiet time. I fixed poor Lou's afflicted head, and am really distressed she has taken that terible eruption.
Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton came down to Tea. We all walked down to the Tombigbee, had a delightful drink from the Artesian Well.
September, Monday 26, 1864
Left dear Waverly at 9 o'c this morning. Mrs. Johnson and Reynolds accompanied me, and tonight we find ourselves quietly ensconsed at Mrs. Henderson's. I met many of my friends at West Point, Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. are there. Mr. Hamilton put us aboard the train, and fortunately I met with an old friend, Tub Anderson, who was guard on the train, he assisted us a great deal. We have spent the evening very pleasantly at Mrs. Henderson's, she is a fine musician, and very accomodating. I miss my friend Lucy so much. Nothing very exciting has transpired today.
September, Tuesday 27, 1864
Oh! how lonely this day has been to me. Mrs. Johnson and Reynolds returned to Waverly on the 7 o'c train. My Hack came soon after, when I left - and I do not think anyone could have spent so lonely a ride as I did, no person except the driver. Mrs. Henderson was very kind indeed to me. I arrived at Pontotoc about 1 o'clock, found Mary alone and delighted to see me. Very stormy and rainy, so I have not accomplished anything and made no preperations for my trip, but will certainly, if providence permits, leave here Thursday morning. I sat up quite late writing to dear Lucy, so that I could send by the boy who drove me up and have mailed at Okolona -
September, Wednesday 28, 1864
Well mercy on me if Pontotoc can't take the lead for dulness, and no way to get on! - I succeeded in getting $50 in G. B. from a Servant - Bro. Will came home about 1 o'c - went over to town and thinks perhaps I can get Mr. Carr to take me over. Cousin Ginnie and Eddie Miller came over and staid a few moments only. No news on earth, and not worth while to write in my journal.
September, Friday 30, 1864
Left Pontotoc 8 o'clock this morning, traveled very hard, but could not make the distance, had a very hard storm about 3 o'c, got perfectly drenched, and oh! how I ached, could not prevail on Mr. Carr to drive me on to Oxford, stoped at a miserable place 2 1/2 miles from there, and oh! such filth, for any one pretending to civilization. I did not sleep an hour, spent a wretched night. Could not eat such filth, and went to bed hungry -
October, Saturday 1, 1864
Awakened at daylight, and all my hurrying could not get Mr. Carr off until rather late - reached my friends Mrs. Barr's to breakfast, and spent a very pleasant day, but very impatient to get on - have not as yet succeeded in getting any conveyance -
October, Sunday 2, 1864
Awakened very late, after a feverish, restless night. Emma and I started out to get a conveyance - Mr. Bacon and Mr. Allexander of Henderson's Scouts proved my friends, borrowed a buggy, and Mr. Johnson, one of their Company, Brother in law of Maj. Ingraham's, on Cheatham's Staff, brot me safely to Panola - arrived here about 7 o'clock. Mrs. Moore sick in bed, but glad to see me, so Mr. Johnson and I ate a hearty supper, and I am fixing for a hot toddy - think my cold will be relieved and save me from a spell - Got in too late, disapointed in seeing Gen. Chalmers tonight -
October, Monday 3, 1864
Was rather despondent some time this morning. Gen. Chalmers came at last, gave me a pass. Mr. Lancaster carried me to the train, where I met Brother Brodie coming up to Senatobia for Helen, we traveled on the horse cars - and of course were some time making the trip. Helen did not come, not a word from her. I am so impatient to go on, but will have to wait here until she arrives. I wrote a long letter to dear Lou tonight, Maj. C. added a postcript -
October, Tuesday 4, 1864
Gloomy, Gloomy and dismal, raining all day. Maj. Crump and I both impatient, but no Helen - he staid most of his time in Telegraph Office. Mrs. Chalmers came, and I had to share my room with her and Kate. I am so impatient to get home. Nothing of importance - crowd continually passing -
October, Wednesday 5, 1864
I arose rather delighted haveing an opportunity of going home, however we got started very late. Mr. & Mrs. Greenlaw & I left Senatobia about 9 o'c got to Cold Water ferry where the Pickets would not pass us without a special pass. Of course we were very much disapointed, but such is the fate of mankind, disapointments, reached Senatobia rather late in the day, found Gen. Chalmers and his command at that place. Gen. C. had taken my place, so I had to sleep with old Mrs. Arnold. Eddie and a great many friends were with Gen. C. they are ready for a raide somewhere, - I think towards Memphis, as the lines North are closed -
October, Thursday 6, 1864
Gen. Chalmers kindly gave me a pass this morning, so I took passage in Dr. Bullington's Cart for home, had no trouble as far as Hernando, arrived there about 1 o'clock, was delayed some time in getting a driver to go on - finally I got a little boy about 10 years old, we started off, but soon found obstructions at Huricane Creek two miles above Hernando, met with our Pickets, and they would allow no one to pass. Old Mr. Nesbit was there and saw how disapointed I was, and whispered to me if I would go back and get a saddle he would assist me in running the pickets. I succeeded in getting everything myself on one horse, the little boy on the other, rode 16 miles after 4 o'clock, arrived at home by 8. Eddie arrived just before me - oh! I was so happy, but no one glad to see me except Laura -
October, Friday 7, 1864
Today has been passed at home, buisy enough with me - having all of Laura's things to fix and my own. Nannie and Sister Mary went to Memphis to try and get me out some things, but have not returned. Eddie and all of us sat in Tate's room after supper. Father made Eddie go to the Cotton pen to sleep - he has not had much pleasure at home. I sleep in Sister Mary's room with poor little Sallie - oh! how my heart aches for those poor little Motherless children.
No Yanks, or any disturbance today -
October, Saturday 8, 1864
Hal came down this morning to spend the day with me. Helen, Laura and the bagage left about ten o'clock. I will not go until Sister Mary and Nannie come -
Eddie left early this morning, Capt. Forrest came by for him a few minutes after he left - Gen. Chalmers got in six miles of Memphis, but found out the Yanks were too many, and retreated in good order - Hal did not stay very late, says she is coming to Col. Young's this Winter. Sister Mary and Nannie got home safe - got nearly all I wanted. Oh! I am miserable, poor old Father, how my heart aches to leave him, yet all is ready to go bright and early in the morning.
October, Sunday 9, 1864
Father came in Sister Mary's room where I was sleeping, before day, and awakened me - I was all ready to start at daylight. The darkies and Aunt Patsy were the only ones up to bid me Good bye. Sister Mary was up also and helped me to get off. I had no apetite, though Bettie had a nice lunch, had to stop at Mr. Hillston's and borrow a horse and leave Ginnie, she could not pull us, had no difficulty after that. Father rode on the horse almost to Cold Water, and Peter in the buggy with me, we bought corn for the horses and ate dinner about four miles below Hernando. Arrived in Senatobia about 4 o'c, stoped at old Mr. Arnold's. Father went out to Mr. Bowdry's after Tea to get a pass home from Gen. Chalmers. Helen went on to Mr. Wallace's.
October, Monday 10, 1864
I got up very early for fear of being left, Father went down and saw me safe on the train. I arrived at Como, and no Helen or baggage - concluded to get off. Mr. Sledge carried me over to Mr. Wallace's in his buggy, I found Father there, and Helen waiting for Maj. Crump. Poor Father, oh! my heart aches to part with him - God forgive me, and oh! let me be blessed to see him once again. I feel like it will kill me - my poor aching heart, Father oh! Father, could I only know you regreted my absence oh! God shield him and spare him for my sake - he left early on his way home. May he have a safe and speedy trip. Maj. Crump arrived, so did Eddie.
October, Tuesday 11, 1864
Gen. Chalmers left this morning for Jackson, Tenn, - the day has been spent rather lazily by me - I have no heart for anything - We cannot go on until Thursday - No news
October, Wednesday 12, 1864
Nothing more today than yesterday, still at Mr. Wallace's. Good news from Ga. if it only be true - our Army will certainly be blessed. All the soldiers gone to Tenn. and the Country here is gloomy and deserted.
October, Thursday 13, 1864
Left Mr. Wallace's very early in time for the train at Como. Car crowded, we got aboard after much maneuvering. An unpleasant trip to Talehatchie, reached the other train in Safety, were delayed some time in Panola to take a Battery aboard, (Thrawl's) - had a pleasant, but slow trip down, did not reach Grenada until after night. Mr. Payne did not get the Dispatch, so we had to hire an Ambulance, and come out to his house. I have an awful Cold, and my night ride did not help it any. I am comfortably ensconsed in a room to myself, Laura only, shares it - My head aches teribly -
October, Friday 14, 1864
Gloomy prospect for weather this morning. Bro. Eddie and Mr. Payne went in to Grenada after breakfast, came back to dinner. No news. Bro. B. succeeded in getting an ambulance, but no Mules. I will have to exercise a great deal of patience - but - know he is doing all he can. I am so grateful for his kindness, and the interest he has taken in me. This is a delightful family, and I am thankful Helen has such a nice home. Bro. Brodie has orders to move to Jackson, Tenn. on Sunday. I have suffered very much with my cold, but think it a little better tonight.
October, Saturday 15, 1864
My trip seems the plans are fully matured, but the clouds are threatening, and I am very much afraid we will have bad weather, if nothing happens, and God's will, I will leave for Pontotoc tomorrow. Bro. Brodie got an Ambulance and Mules from Capt. Mickle, and Mr. Payne will send one of his boys to drive. My cold is much better today. I wrote two letters home - the day has been spent very quietly, but pleasantly. Still no news from the Army -
October, Sunday 16, 1864
Maj. Crump was up before daylight, and off for his trip to Tenn. I got up also, but did not get off until 9 o'clock. Helen and I came to Grenada in the Carriage. I met the Ambulance at Capt. Mickle's Office, bid farewell to Grenada and my friends at 10 o'clock, Helen returned to Mr. Payne's. I started on my journey to Pontotoc with Laura for a Companion, and old Uncle Thornton, Mr. Payne's Servant, for Driver. We had a very rough trip, got lost, and tonight find ourselves only 20 miles from Grenada - at Mr. Peirson's, five miles from Coffeeville. No Ladie in the house - I have a nice, comfortable room, and do not feel afraid with Laura - hope Uncle Thornton and the Mules are at rest also. Saw Dr. DeHart in Coffeeville this evening -
October, Monday 17, 1864
Well! here I sit tonight 20 miles from Pontotoc - only traveled 24 miles today, through the poorest Country, and worst roads, I'll wager, in Dixie, the celebrated Calhoun County. The people are dirty, miserable looking creatures - with no tastes and scarcely any civilization, fortuneately I met with comfortable quarters for the night, at Mr. Sadler's, one mile north of Serepta, a little village, only the name - Banner we passed through abour 4 o'c - oh! misery, I would die if I had to live in such a Country. Our Mules did finely, but poor creatures I know they are as much rejoiced as we are to be over those bad roads. We were lost again today, poor Uncle Thornton has very little idea of routes. I have a clean bed, and nice pine torch - with Laura's company will pass the night very well -
October, Tuesday 18, 1864
Arrived in Pontotoc after 12, broke down just under the big hill, below Bro. Will's -
October, Thursday 20, 1864
Uncle Thornton started back to Grenada this morning, I reckon the Ambulance will last until he gets there. I was sorry to send it back to Capt. Mickle broken, but could not avoid it.
October, Sunday 23, 1864
I left Pontotoc this morning for Waverly - a very warm, unpleasant ride, in a rough Dixie hack. (Spring Wagon) -
Arrived in Okolona just after sundown. Mrs. Henderson received me very cordially, and I spent a very pleasant eve. Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Vasser and Mr. Henderson being of the party -
October, Monday 24, 1864
Up bright and early. Mr. Henderson bro't me down to the Depot - had no trouble, but a very pleasant ride to West Point. Mr. Hamilton met me, and oh! I am so happy to be with my friends once more. Lou and Grand Mother arrived just after the train, and after sitting awhile with Mr. Hamilton, we started on our journey toward Waverly, arrived before dinner. Mr. Willie and Jimmie Young, Maj. Cheatham & Maj. Young arrived soon after from the Brown place with the body of poor old Rannie. I of course am happy. Lu and I went in bathing, but oh! 'twas miserable cold -
October, Tuesday 25, 1864
Grand Mother left for Ga. today, Mrs. Johnson went to Columbus with her. Lou, Grand Mother & I went up to see Mrs. Hamilton - the day passed as usual, always delightfully for me at Waverly -
November, Friday 4, 1864
Today is Lou 22nd. birthday -
November, Saturday 5, 1864
Lou and I spent the day with Mrs. Hamilton, who is dangerously ill. Mrs. Willie Young came after Tea, and sat until bed time. Mrs. Tom Young, Lou and I sat up all night, sent two messages for Dr. Smithe got back until daylight. She was over the sick spell, and the Drs pronounce her out of danger -
November, Monday 7, 1864
Received two letters from home, one from Tate, one from Sister Mary - all well -
November, Tuesday 15, 1864
Capt. Sanders & Ladie, Mrs. Pat Hamilton arrives from Aberdeen - Miss Annie is as beautiful as ever, and has a beautiful boy -
November, Thursday 17, 1864
My 24th. birth day - I wonder if any one thought of me at home
November, Friday 18, 1864
Lou and I went to Columbus, saw Mrs. Rambout, but no news from home. Saw Therese also Bro. Geo. then called on Miss Williams - A cloudy, bad day -
November, Saturday 19, 1864
Bro. Geo. came according to promise and spent the day with us - a miserable, bad day. The boat sunk, so he had to cross in a skiff - went back to Columbus -
November, Sunday 20, 1864
Mrs. Sanders & Capt. went up to Miss Em's - Col. Mumford and Lt. Young left this morning
November, Monday 31, 1864
Lou, Mr. Willie, Maj. Cheatham and I spent the even'g at Mrs. Hamilton's. Capt. Sanders & Lady, Mr. Jimmie and Miss Em, we spent a very pleasant even'g -
This manuscript has been copied with faithful effort to reproduce it, preserving as far as possible the original spelling, punctuation, etc. The copy has been verified with the original, and necessary corrections made. Where there is grave doubt as to a word or name, this is indicated by a question mark.