
The Grove Plantation St. Paul's Parish South Carolina
December 10 1860. -
We came up very nicely on the 3d Mr Grimball Ella Lotty Harry & Racky, the sky terrier, a most intelligent and affectionate little dog. When Lewis was in Liverpool, Bob Miller gave him this puppy, & he brought it home, we are all attached to her, and she enjoys the change as much as any of us. - I am to keep her until Lewis marries, then his wife, if fond of Dogs, is to take her.
John is as happy as a child and so much like a child that I agree with Lewis in thinking the only change in him is that he has grown, he enjoys a joke & makes fun but - he is terribly obstinate, which is an ascertained fact - consequently when John says he wont do anything I dont like to interfere. Lewis has come to the conclusion that his prospects up here are not worth anything, his practise is pretty much a family affair, and not at all progressive, on the contrary, the life of several old people would close it, except at home, his Grandfather and Mrs Wayne, so he intends going to Charleston and attending Medical Lectures, and practising there. So there is every prospect of our having the 6 boys at home next summer. I think I shall take a travel off somewhere, & relieve myself of the Housekeeping. I have been trying to persuade Berkly to got married, he has been set up with 5 thousand dollars, he had saved 1 thousand himself, and is so saving I suppose he will soon have 10 thousand: and I am afraid be a miser too; which is hateful. I wish some of them could get married and settled off. - Elizabeth has of course to wait until a good offer comes, but the boys can ask. -
Mr W. Heyward has promised us a visit, and now that the house has got fixed, I shall be very glad for him to come. Lewis tells me Mrs Bulo laughed a great deal about her visit up here, and the manner in which Mrs Manigault & Mrs Grimball were taken in by her. She is not a nice person, I am afraid much of the scandal retailed about her, is true. She had very little to do with me, but was much thrown with Charlotte, riding with her on horseback, &c. Papa paid the 4 thousand to the Factors that Charles owed them.
We came up in the cars with Major Wharley and his new young wife, an English lady, & her baby, she is much taller than her old husband; and looks like his daughter; she was poor, or I am sure she could never have married that blear-eyed old creature.
December 15 1860
It seems strange that we should be in the midst of a revolution so quiet, and plentiful, & corn for table up here. Everything goes on as usual, the planting, the negroes, all just the same; & a great Empire tumbling to pieces about us; and a great pressure in the money market in all parts of the country; westrange to say; were never so easy, and I hope thankful. Went yesterday to see Charlotte, Mrs Wayne, & Papa found the last at home, Charlotte had gone up to Mrs Barings on a visit. They think of purchasing a place in Buncomb and of Mrs B's place. Mrs Wayne begged to be excused she was putting her garret to rights.
Charles is coming up to day on his way to Philadelphia to bring Mrs Britten & Elizabeth home. I have made up my mind now for E to remain until January and do not care for her to come before. -
We pass our evenings very pleasantly with music and reading & sewing & talking, the boys Lewis & John are agreeable. L belongs to a company in this parish and seems most anxious for a war, a restless young man: I do hope there will be no war, but a peaceful arrangement of our difficulties. -
Mr Aiken paid us a long morning visit waiting for some friends by the cars. Mr & Mrs James baby & nurse, she was a Miss Lowndes and he a rich New York beau, a funny time they take for their visit; but her Mother & father live on Santee in winter where he had a plantation they are all rich and high born. Mrs Robert Lowndes was a Miss Livingston the daughter of Mrs Maturin Livingston who was a Miss Lewis, the only child of Gen. Lewis who left a fortune of a Million which Mrs M. L. on her death divided equally among her 9 children giving thereby great satisfaction, to all of them. I recollect Mrs Robert Lowndes when she first came to Charleston as a bride, and a most beautiful bride, she was dressed in the highest fashion & taste & exceedingly refined and elegant looking.
Received a letter from Elizabeth today, she & her Aunt will leave Norwood the 1 week in January it is very cold there now every thing covered with snow. -
An envelope came containing cards from Emma Watts & Lieut. Carr U.S.A. just married. When her father died nearly 2 years since the family had each 10 thousand dollars which is a very neat fortune and Emma although not beautiful is very sensible and amiable. It seems to me all the world are getting married except my children. I wish a suitable offer would come in Elizabeths way & that it would please her to accept it & that Berkley could find some nice girl with a little money to get married to. John will be obliged to resign & then he must try something else. - All this troubles me.
29 December
The Xmas passed very pleasantly with us, the boys were all here and we had a tree fixed off in a very lively and interesting manner with little Canibusses, ships, tables, chairs & dolls dressed, and lighted by little tapers. Papa dined with us, and we had a nice dinner and were pleasant. John has resigned and gone to town to offer his services to the Governor, he is very much enchanted at getting rid of a profession his heart was not very much interested in, and William and Berkley are very sorry he has given up his support. It is a great addition to Mr Grimballs expenses 3 hundred dollars a year. -
Mrs Wayne has been talking in her flighty style about giving her Palmetto nephews a New Years party. I said what I could to prevent her going to this unnecessary expense for she has not threshed her crop or sold it and has not been able give her negroes clothes, this winter, but now the matter is at rest, for the boys have been obliged to go to Town. Fort Moultry has been abandoned, and the U.S. troops commanded by Major Anderson have been clandestinely removed to Fort Sumpter, so the troops have been ordered off, and are marching round & round, to show their spirit and excitement. -
Daisy Barnwell dined with Lotty on Thursday & I think is a very fast little girl: she seemed wild with delight at John & Arthur flirting with her: & looked very pretty, Lotty is to dine with her to day if she can get there.
Mr Grimball is suffering from an attack of his difficult breathing, last night I had to get up & make the fire, he took his remedy but it does not relieve very soon.
A Plantation life is a very active one. This morning I got up late having been disturbed in the night, hurried down to have something arranged for breakfast, Ham, & eggs, wrote a letter to Charles in answer to one he wrote about Johns resigning, disapproving of it. Had prayers, got off the boys to town. Had work cut out, gave orders about dinner, had the horse feed fixed in hot water, had the box filled with cork: - went to see about the carpenters working at the negro houses, where there are men mending chimneys, white washing, & these carpenters Mr Grimball told me he wished me to see about every day, & now I have to cut out flannel jackets, and alter some work. -
Amy's leg continues very bad, I don't know when she will get better, a most provoking thing, for it is owing to her own stupidity.
31 December
the last day of the year, a gloomy, wet day, which were it not for the busy occupations of each hour would be very trying to the spirits. - Went to Church yesterday, and heard an excellent sermon from Mr Dickson, a retrospect of the past year, a very instructive train of thought. I have so many mercies to be thankful for, and here, while numbers are homeless, am enjoying a most comfortable establishment and what a poor creature I am, little deserving of any mercy. -
I was thinking over the children this morning and I find a loving and hopeful feeling for all of them. As people get old they become more indifferent and are spared much annoyance by not feeling or seeing things which when they were young almost crazed them.
1 January 1861
The year began with clouds & rain. I went out with Josey to Drive as Lucius was sent to the Depot expecting Mr Hayward & visited Mrs Wayne, Papa & Mrs Manigault, Papa out, Mrs Wayne preparing for a grand party, which must have disapointed her, as it rained all the evening, Sent in our excuses, the boys had already done so. Charlotte was very busy putting up curtains and looking dirty & ragged, it was evident she felt no superstition about the first of the year being a pattern for all the rest. She is getting so set looking that it spoils her appearance. I feel very dull about the boys, they may all be called out to fight. John has offered his services to the Governor for active duty, & all the others are in Military companies and of course will have to be exposed. I sent them down a New Year wish, & if we never meet again in this world, my last greeting to them was a sincere prayer for their salvation. Lewis went off today to Town.
January 7th
Elizabeth arrived from the North with her Aunt, who went on to Butlers Island, where she is to stay for some time, a month at least. E. looks very well in health and in spirits, and gives a pleasant account of her visit. John has been appointed Lieutenant in the State Service, and is now at Fort Moultry, where he is rather uncomfortable. -
William was at the Arsenal with his Company, Lewis is in some trouble about his commission and has gone to Town to day to see the Governor about it, he, the Gov. does not seem to be a very military chief and consequently is in rather a tight place. Berkley has joined the Sumpter Guards, which is an elderly and sedate bodey of men with an elderly and sedate Captain, John Russel of King Street, a book seller. - Charles sent me word by Elizabeth that Harry thought it proper for the security of the Northern property to have it made over to himself but felt a delicacy in proposing it. I spoke to Papa, & he wrote to Harry this morning, - & sent the letter by Lewis. E. has gone to town to see her friends & brothers.
January 12th
Lewis returned from Town with an uncomfortable account of the Forts, Sumpter is still in charge of Major Anderson and a vessel the Star of the West with men & supplies on board for the Fort, was fired into and prevented from communicating. Major Anderson declared the Port blocaded, and that he would fire on any boats coming in or going out. And after a spirited letter from the Governor, requested that Lieut. Talbot be permitted to go to Washington with letters which was granted. The Fort has to be taken. William with his Company will be at Morris's Island, and Arthur with him. John in Fort Moultry. If I were to allow myself to think of these things I should be wild; but there is no use. Went yesterday to see Charlotte, Papa and Mrs Wayne, found C. & Mrs W at home. C's governess not come which rather surprises her. Mrs W. tells me Mrs Lewis's governess has left her, Mrs L. has a favorite maid, Emma, a very light Mulatoe & her son, who tell her every thing which goes on in her house, and made a great many extraordinary communications about the Governess, which she refused to submit to and left. I do not think my cousin Annie will ever have a Governess. Mrs Stevens has, C. says, quite a nice one, and she takes to flirting with Mr Stevens greatly to the disgust of Mrs S. who flirted away most violently with a Dr Foster, a homeopathic man, and says openly she does not care for her husband, yet will not willingly submit to his attentions to the Governess. I think upon the whole they are rather trying additions to ones family, I am very thankful there is no need of one with us. Mr Grimball went off to Town the day Lewis came up, he must have gone at any rate, for he said he wanted to see the boys. Every one feels restless & excited in these transition times, I only hope we may have a peaceful settlement of this sepparation. I expect up Mr G. & E. to day, & Mrs Wayne is to dine with us and to hear the news, & Papa is coming too. -
Mr Grimball & Elizabeth arrived from Town and had seen John. Mrs. Wayne dined, Papa arrived here before we had finished our soup and seemed altogether in a bad humor, in answer to most news he said he did not believe a word of it: and aluded in rather a bantering tone to the fact of the raw Carolina recruits running at, or even before the fire of the English, Elizabeth fresh from Town and seeing her brothers, heartily earnest in the service of the State, said anyone who says the Carolina troops would run, should be shot. Papa was very angry, and the next day wrote me a letter, the thing will of course drop. -
We all feel very anxious about the taking of Fort Sumpter, it is in negociation but that failing, must be got for the State even at great loss of life, and in view of this I wake in the night and pray most heartily to my Father in Heaven, and my merciful Savior to save us or we perish.
Went to see Papa on his return from Town, he had an attack last night, and seemed very tired.
Had a nice visit from Mrs Barnwell and Ann, she is very clever. We were talking of men, I said the result of my experience was to say, if asked for advice, if you want to do so you had better do it, and if you don't want to do so you had better not do it, for I never found my advice was attended to, Ann said if she ever had an offer when the man was on his knees, she would make him promise all sorts of things; - I said they never went on their knees, & asked Margaret if Mr Barnwell offered himself on his knees. Ann said I can never imagine Papa the least sentimental & think he must have proposed as a passing remark between a conversation about the crops. In view of Mr Barnwells very stiff & settled manner, this is quite funny.
In looking over my account of things I find I neglected to notice a very handsome entertainment which Mr Lewis gave to introduce his daughter, the boys were all invited, and Berkley & William went. They arrived at Ashapoo in time for Lunch & afterwards went out with horses, riding or driving, & rowing on the river. Had a very handsome dinner, sat down 30; and in the evening music from Town, and a band with some outside additions, & danced until five o'clock they then went to their rooms, and after resting 3 hours had breakfast, hot cakes, omlet, sausages, spare ribs, which B. said were not spare at all. Just our boys, and Frank Frost & Jim Fraser even slept in the same room, Mr Lewis doing the honors, the rest sat up. Most of the party were to return to the City by the 1 o'clock train, our boys came by the early train, & Mr Lewis must have been making arrangements for a long time, and succeeded. -
Elizabeth staid while in Town with her Aunt, they are in a great state of excitement about the Forts, & Martin & Berkly in military exposure. M. has gone to Castle Pinckney, and as he is delicate I predict that he will either be made ill, or a great deal better by the exposure. -
Papa has determined this winter of all times to remove Elizabeth Morris remains from the vault at Morrisania and put it in the Lowndes vault in Charleston & also Ralph and put him into a grave up here at the Bluff (?) Church for when the property is sold the vault must be emptied of the remains, (Papa had to give up this removal), for which he has provided a sum of 5 hundred dollars to get another vault at a Church near by. - Mr Whaly says Mrs Wayne is coming to perfect poverty, but she will entertain to the end, she has Friday for her receptions days, I like to go, it amuses me everything is so odd, shoes under the chairs and bags of dirty calico full of feathers on chairs for cushions. - She reminds me of Grandmama who always at Morrisania had her shoes, hat and shawl in the drawing room. -
The first of this week Mr Grimball sent 10 men, under the charge of Lewis, to work at the Fort which they are putting up at the mouth of the Edisto river to protect the coast. Col. Jenkins sent 6 hands, his son Dr. Paul, 3, Col. Ashe 10, & they all went together. Lewis had some stores, & Georgy Jenkins, who went with his Fathers hands, told Lewis not to trouble himself, for he intended taking a whole sheep. Papa went while on one of his visits to the City, to see the Gov. and told him during the War of 1812, with England the Coast had been surveyed & it was judged unnecessary to build Forts as owing to the bars at the mouth of the rivers that they were inaccessable. The Gov. thanked Papa for his advice but - they are putting up two Forts, & Papa says he will not give a cent, or send a hand; so says the Miser, Ephraim Bainard, but others send, Mr Barnwell and others. Mr Grimball preferred sending here to Morris's Island.
January 30th
Lewis returned and had a very nice time was handsomely entertained and enjoyed the change, the negroes seemed to like it too. Mr John Townsand was very much interested in the Fort -
Things seem to progress, the Southern States are going out one after another and the border states undetermined. -
We dined with Papa last week, a very handsome affair, and the party consisted of Mrs Wayne, ourselves & Miss Butler, Charlotte's new Governess, he gave us a nice dinner. Charlotte & her little girls & Governess took lunch with us on Saturday, we had music, & cake, & wines, and I enjoyed Charlotte's society. She says Miss Butles seems to be a very pleasant tempered person with rather more of the Irish accent than she expected. She hopes she will answer her purposes for 2 years, and seems very much concerned to have these children well educated. -
Things seem to progress in a slow but certain way. John is now in command of a Steamboat to watch the harbor, he alternates with Pilot and I hope will get paid for his services. -
Charles has resigned, and intends offering his services to the State of Georgia. I am sorry he will lose his pay, but the State will pay. Lewis made a visit to the Fort at Edisto to see if Bing Smith intended resigning his place of Captain, for then Lewis would try for it. -
He went down in the boat and had lunch here, at 11 o'clock, and the next day returned & dined here. 4 went with him, W. Simons, Megget, Weston, Walters, - but Bing Smith chooses to keep his post. -
We returned Mrs Barnwells visit the other day & found her at home; she expressed herself very much concerned by the ill health of her husband. Last summer Dr Ogiier said he ought to go away & take care or himself he said he could not leave his business, & now he looks very badly has most painful symptoms, palpitation of the heart, & all that, and is afraid of a disease of that organ. I met with an annoying accident a few days since, in walking up the road. I took off my glove, a large dog skin one, and having lately worn on my little finger my wedding ring, because it had become too small, it slipped off and I have not been able to find it. I am going to purchase another & in the mean time wear the ring belonging to my eye-glasses, which had become loosened. -
10 Feb.
Lewis went to the City & bought for me an old fashioned wed. ring for $3, a very satisfactory arrangement. - Lewis saw all the boys in Town, John alternates with Peter in harbor duty, and has a boy Bacot with him which gives him 4 hours sleep, he always has some man from the City Companies with him. Berkly, who is in the Sumpter Guards, said when he went out there were only 4 men in the detatchment fit for duty, Berkly, Wilkins, himself & 2 others. The rest were horribly sea sick, or very drunk. Oh! my country men!
Lewis is now proposing to himself to apply for a commission in the Army of the State. Poor Notty's boy, I wish some thing might suit him. -
He had a very nice photograph of himself taken, and gave it to me. He is quite a good looking follow. - Charles has resigned, and is in the service of the State of Georgia, Lewis met him going to Town on Public business when he came up. - Mrs Butler still at Butler's Island. Went to see Juliet Elliott yesterday, she is up for the Spring, she says, unless there is a war. - She looks wonderfully, and is as usual, a gossiping, frivolous woman - but I do not think her gifts are many, and perhaps she does as well as she can. She told me Mrs Lucia Lowndes was in a miserable fix with her two eldest daughters, Lucia & Emily, they had not spoken to her for several years, and lived while they remained at Litchfield entirely apart, and when she came back which she did last fall, refused to accompany her. Lucia says she intends to be a Governess, & Emily says she intends to be a Childs nurse. What a terrible situation, these unprotected girls will be in there. I told Juliet in a case like this there must be faults on both sides. She seemed to take the part of the Mother. -
Charlotte prefers our meetings to take place in the afternoons as the morning is altogether taken up with her childrens lessons. Went last Saturday although it was an afternoon cloudy and the day had been rainy. We talked a little, and had tea, and came home refreshed. Mr John Elliott has been engaged to take charge of the Church up here and as Mrs LaRoche is not able to come this winter, Elizabeth has taken upon herself to play on the organ and lead the singing. - Ella is to go with her, & Miss Butler, Charlotte's Governess. Mrs. Wayne had a Lunch yesterday, to which we went. She expected Mrs. Barnwell, & her daughter, but they did not come, Mr. B had unexpectedly returned. She expected Charlotte but she did not come on account of the girls & their lessons. -
Mrs. Brown and her step daughter came, she is the wife of the Methodist Missionary, quite a good looking & educated woman. E. stopped at the Church to practise on the organ, & came to the lunch. Mrs. Wayne had adorned her person in her peculiar style, a bunch of black lace in front of her head, a pink rose on each side like two horns, and pink strings hanging down. Her own perfect satisfaction with herself was pleasant to see; we had sausages, lamb chops, rice, & sweet meats, and she is very hospitable. -
Mr. Lewis has taken rooms at the Miles house, and Mrs. John Vanderhorst is introducing his daughter, Julia, they have receptions. - He seems very fond of his children, & to be trying to make Julia have a nice time. -
Charlotte, her girls & Governess came to tea, an unsettled looking afternoon. The music on Sunday was not as good as it will be for Elizabeth did not understand about the stops. -
Feb. 21
We had Annie Heyward and Ann Barnwell to dine on Wednesday, & Papa & Mrs W. expected, but her horse lame, she could not come
Annie H. is quite a nice girl, she has taken charge of her little sisters since her Mother's death, and looks like an amiable, motherly girl. She took the Sulphur Baths this Summer, and her hair fell out, she now wears a wig until it grows and looks very well in it. -
Ann B. is clever, but rather sharp, she is a very good looking girl, and has quite a taste for dress. -
March 5
Mr Grimball went to Town to see about the boys. We understood they were to be ordered down to Morris's Island & he wished to give them, William & Arthur, a little money towards fixing themselves comfortably. He found they were not at that time ordered: so he left an order for $50 with W. to be used if they seem to require it.
Papa went down on Monday and we went over to pay a visit to the Aikens, found Mrs A. at home, better I think, and Miss A. talked away pleasantly, as usual.
On Tuesday visited Mr Elliott and his wife and invited them to dine with us the next day. Mrs Wayne, Mrs Vanderhorst were also of the party and the dinner was quite a pleasant one. I am very glad the thing is over, for it was to be done. Mr Elliott is an intelligent and pleasant mannered young man. -
Things remain as they were.
March 15
There seems to be every prospect of a peaceful arrangement of the difficulties between the North & the South. The Forts will be given up, and we will go on as usual. I have been reading some old letters for the last week, and they interest me so very much, they are from my Grandmother Manigault to my Mother, and there are also letters from some of her Sisters to her, they commence in 1807, about which time my Mother was married, and end in 1822 in which year, the 22 of September, she died, being crushed in the fall of the house they lived in, on Sulivan's Island, during the storm of that year. It is the history of a whole family, contained in these letters, and the lesson, the shortness of life. These letters give an insight into the domestic life of very accomplished people, and the charm which elegant tastes surround life with, are very perceptible. My Grandmother's style is very fine, so simple, & so clever, & she describes the events daily passing around her, in a fascinating manner. My Grandfather lived in South Carolina and determined to move to Philadelphia where he died soon after the purchase of an estate in the country, of Apaplexy, brought on by anxiety of mind, & worry. In 1815 Emma died of consumption, in 1817 Caroline died, in 1818 Charlotte died, the tome of these letters, the gradual change from full happiness to the sad desolation of being nearly alone, just Ella & I with her, is very painful, the effort to be cheerful, the yearning for Mama's society. She died 2 years after. It was not usual then for people to express themselves on religious subjects as they do now, and therefore it is not proper to judge of my Grandmother's feelings on this subject by what she does not say. -
In the first place, her husband, who was a most devoted one, died when they had been married 22 years. My Mother died when she had been married 16 years. This March we have been married 31 years, is this not a cause for thankfulness. Here is a man cultivated, very much in love with his old wife of 51 years and, although not in robust health, getting on, more amiable than he was, more easy in his means and my children, such as ought to satisfy any woman, - but I wish they, the elder ones, could be settled, married well, it is for the happiness of a woman & for that of a man. I could wish that Elizabeth was well married and Berkley & Lewis; William might wait a little longer but if anyone very desirable should offer I would not object. I cannot alter this, and I think it better so, than married in an unsuitable way. -
Elizabeth went to pay a visit to Mrs Vanderhorst, we expect them back to day. -
The pledge Lewis gave his Father the last Spring in March he faithfully kept, and when it expired, he said he would not take another until he found it necessary. - He seems so unsettled, so restless, I am truly sorry for him, and I pray for him. -
March 20
Mr Grimball wondered at my enjoyment of the old letters, and says he does not like to hear them read, although he did not know any of the people. I say, for that very reason I enjoy “them”, they are no longer here but I rejoice that such charming, elegant people belonged to me, & their memory & their lives, delight me. My Grandmother I loved, and she more than returned the affection. Aunt Caroline we also knew. Aunt Charlotte, Aunt Harriet, Uncle Wilcocks, Miss Mease, Mr Vaughn, Mr Short, my Great Grandmother, Aunt Deas, Aunt George, Aunt Balfour, the Smiths. Incidents in the letters bring them all to me again. -
Elizabeth returned from Chicasee with Arnoldus who remained with us until Monday, and then went on to the City. He dined at Papas on Saturday. In the afternoon we had an early tea, Mrs Barnwell, Ann, & Emma Manigault were here, and it was pleasant. Elizabeth had a nice time at Chickasee. - They all dined with Charlotte on Monday. - We have had snow. -
John is now Lieutenant on board the “Lady Davis”, the first war vessel of the State.
29 March
We found that the list of Navy Officers published did not include John, and went to the City to have it rectified, or to find out why John was left out. - John says they have not come down to him yet, and he is acting Lieutenant, and receiving 15 hundred dollars, is in active service. -
I had a very pleasant visit, the boys were affectionate and attentive, and I had a good shopping, the children are pleased with what I got. - Mrs Wilkins was suffering from her eyes and Eliza was not feeling well. -
Papa does his business very loosely and is now engaged in a law suit with Simons about a canal. All the people who can testify in his favor are dead, with but one or two exceptions, and he has no papers to show. William has the case, and Nelson Mitchel has been since engaged in it. - Mrs Wayne has a Northern woman to visit her just now, rather a second rate sort of a person. - Mrs Mitchel.
Things are just the same in regard to the Fort, Anderson is now to be starved out. - All this time he has been allowed to furnish himself from the Market with fresh Provisions, - which is carrying out Scripture “feeding our enemy, and doing good to those who do evil to us.”
Charlotte has Mrs Bulow & Mrs Gummage on a visit to her. C. did not altogether like them as visitors but she asked them last Spring & felt herself obliged to confirm it this April. They are much talked about and therefore not desirable friends, Mrs B. a pretty, clever, coarse woman, with a little dog & a riding horse, Mrs G. a middle aged, uneducated, coarse, woman, with a little grandaughter, very delicate and worm afflicted, in her looks. -
We have stopped the early teas.
Mrs Wayne & Mr Mitchel came to see us by invitation & take tea, they evidently expected a party and were dressed, we had no one and with the aid of Music, passed the time.
12th April
Things seem at last to have reached the War point. The 17th Regiment has been ordered down to Morris's Island, and The Northern Government have sent to inform the Southern that they intend to reinforce the Forts, and collect the revenue. A fleet is expected off the Harbour, and every thing is in a state of preparation. - 4 of the boys are on duty, Berkley in the Sumpter Guards, and Arthur & William in the Cadet Riflemen. Lewis wants to volunteer in the Sumpters, I think he ought not. John is now on constant duty, and seems actively engaged; he wrote to us yesterday that he had been in Town for Anchors, and found the house deserted, only Adam, covered with White Wash. He said he was alive but he could not say kicking, for he could hardly move one leg before the other, he was so tired. - Mr Grimball went down to see about the boys, and found them all gone, he will return on Saturday, and then we shall hear. All yesterday I was in a most terrible state of anxiety and misery, about my boys - but I know my case is not different from others. Mrs Elliott, the Mother of William's Captain, has her only child down there, Mrs Lowndes her only son, & many others, but mine are very fine boys, and very dear to me, still they must do their duty to their State; and I put my trust in my God, & their God, my Savior & their Savior, - and I Pray for them & for myself. - The Government at Washington seem full of duplicity, and in looking back to the conduct of the seceding States, there seems to have been a truthful and noble faith, actuating them.
Fortunately, before things came to the War, the interest was paid on the money at the North, and I have mine now in Charleston, six hundred and ninety seven dollars. I am very glad of this for it will help us through the Summer. -
Mrs Bulow & Mrs Gammage have left Charlotte, they were sent for. -
Went to Papa's this morning he had been to Mr Barnwell to hear the news. Mr B. wrote to his wife that yesterday at 1 o'clock Gen. Boregeard demanded the surrender of the Fort from Anderson, he replyed he could not with honor, and this morning at 5 o'clock the war began, we have not heard the guns. The news is that the “Harriet Lane” U S S is out side with troops and supplys.
14th April
Lewis went down yesterday afternoon and returned today by an express train, he brings us news that Fort Sumpter is given up, after a gallant defence, when Major Anderson evacuated it, he requested to be allowed to salute his Flag, and Gen. Boregard said, that he had defended his command so bravely that he should be permitted to do so. He wrote to his wife a letter which was sent to Gen. B. to forward, he had to open it, - and it was said to contain these words, among others, “My Government have shamefully abandoned me” and I shall now fight and die like a man”.
There were none killed on either side, the Fort has been destroyed inside, - Officer's quarters burnt. -
The men looked thin & smoked up with the shells which were most of them sent by Stephen's Battery; Fort Moultry was uninjured, 5 men wounded in the evacuated Fort. -
How thankful we are, not however as much so as we ought to be;
Yesterday after Church I stopped to see Papa, this I always do on Sunday and these visits are very pleasant to me. He loves us all in his way & gives me some oysters which he buys from Mr La Roche's man who brings them for sale to the Church, - and I hear family news. During this excitement and anxiety I do not think Charlotte has been very kind in her manners, she I have no doubt felt, but on such occasions people ought to express themselves to be understood, I find her an excellent, well principled woman, with a disagreeable temper, & no manners: but in this world we must be thankful for the good we find in those who belong to us, and not judge them too harshly. - Charlotte has on many occasions been kind to us all, and I thank her. Mr Grimball remained in Town until tomorrow. - Mrs Butler writes to Papa that the Overseer came to her & said he had a letter from Mr Pierce Butler saying he must send a boat to take his to W. Simon's & send Eleck. She ordered him not to send the boat and that Eleck was waiting on her. She said she was there, in charge of the property, & would continue so, has written to Judge Law to confirm her action she says her case is a very hard one, and she deplores it. Richard seems to be very ill, spits blood, & coughs, and she writes very wofully of him, & says she certainly will not leave him in Georgia, he has an Overseer, and leaves things to him. Charles also has an Overseer, and being engaged in fixing guns in Fort Pulasky, and expecting to be in a steamer in coast guard all summer will be able to visit his Plantation, & see about his affairs, I don't think Richard & Charles get on very nicely, - & I am sure it must be Richard's fault, for Charles is a very kind, good tempered man, and Richard has always been very self willed & passionate. -
Harry during the transaction of our business together wrote me a very nice letter, he expresses a kind interest in my boys and I love him for it; and he hopes still for a Reconstruction. That may be hoped for but can never, never, be.
There have been too many bitter feelings between the two sections and it seems to me it would have been just as reasonable for us to be rearranged as British provinces soon after the Revolution broke out, as for us to go back to a Government with our taunting, Fanatic, Northern brothers. -
15 April
This morning we received a very pleasant visit from Charlotte, she feels but does not know how to express herself. Mr Aiken also came over and paid a very pleasant visit. He told us of the early history of General Boregard, he was a graduate of West Point & the second honour man, he had become very much attached to Virginia Scott, the daughter of Gen. Scott, & was refused by both parents but accepted by the young lady, she wrote to him but his letters were repressed and hers ceased after a time. This preyed on her health, she went into the Catholic Convent at George Town, and there died, before her death she sent for Gen. Boregard and saw him, he explained to her that he had always written, the letters were kept from her. She died, but 6 Months after he married another. “Men have died and worms have eaten them but not for love”. - (And now has a second wife).
In this days paper there is an account of the evacuating of the Fort Sumpter. Anderson has gone to the Fleet, this is the first time the U.S. Flag has been lowered, and now to the Palmetoe Flag. -
There seems to be a determination on the part of the Northern Government to war with us. When Major Anderson fired the salute to his Flag, 5 of his men were wounded, & 1 of them died immediately, the other not expected to live. This is very strange. I think my State has behaved most entirely according to the dictates of humanity, & true courage, in the treatment of the people in this Fort, they were fed, and beaten, & honourably dismissed. -
We have done well, & I this morning read a commendation in the papers “the World”, an Abolition journal, of the conduct of South Carolina, “throughout this contest & since secession”. The unselfish bravery with which she had conducted herself”. - May God bless and keep us, is my prayer, and may peace be restored to these States, may we each, North, & South - Governed by those who best understand our rights & our wants, I mean ourselves, be good neighbors & help each other on in the road to prosperity. -
On Sunday the scene in St. Philips was very affecting. Our Bishop Davis, now very feeble and blind was led up to the pulpit and returned thanks to Almighty God for his protection & his mercies. He, too had a relative among the troops. - Mrs Wayne went down to the City on Saturday and the cars being very much crowded & late in getting down. Lewis had to charge himself with the getting these two Mrs W. &her Mitchel in a carriage. It was 12 o'clock at night before they all got at home. Lewis found no one but his father at home & he seems quite well, the war agrees with him.
22 April.
Virginia has seceded and all the border States seem to be coming in: the movements of the U.S. Government have been very suicidal every act tells in a way to benefit us. There has been a riot in Philadelphia in which the Black Republican spirit was fully exhibited, all the accounts tend to shewing a determination at the North to sustain the Government and so there is at the South; - I believe this will give peace.
Arthur was sent up from Morris's Island to the City to get over an attack of Dysentary. Mr Grimball went down to see after him. -
Every where there are commotions great and small, in Charleston. Taking Fort Sumpter, up here. Mr Elliott said he would hear the children their chatecism and Harry although he has been learning his for 6 years did not know it so said Mrs Barnwell of her two, Richard & Ella, she said she felt as if she would be humiliated, I told Mr Elliott of Harry's deficiancy. So last Sunday the children went up, after a most charming sermon addressed to the parents, and said their chatecism very well, H. had learnt his all the week, & Mr Elliott gave them some books which they either are to read & keep, or return. - Mr Elliott is to preach 2 more Sundays, is to recieve 3 hundred dollars, for the 3 Month, - and will come back next winter. - Mr Dixson the Presbyterian Minister has resigned, from ill health, - and gone away. -
Yesterday Mrs Wayne came late & spent the evening. She took tea, & went away at 1/2 eleven, she gave the history of her Mitchel. She was married at the age of 16 to a young man named Hardenbrook, he had a large fortune, settled it seems on his children. They were divorced, and she took her maiden name, the children are given to the father's Mother & she is allowed to see them. 2 little boys, 1, 4, the other 7. Mr Hardenbrook this lady says is a very abandoned man. I do not think her manners impress favorably. - Mrs Wayne gave a very amusing account of her ox, & little blue cart getting Mrs Rosalie Mitchel's heavy baggage to the cars, the ox several times took to the woods & swamp. This animal is large and harnessed with blinds, an old horse fixing. Mr Lewis has hired Russell Middleton's house on South bay for the summer, this Mrs L. does not like the place, is rather too public. She is shy, & not always attentive to her appearance. I am glad of her being there for I like her. - The Governess they had early in the winter was a very mischief making woman, she wrote notes to Mr Lewis, noticing Annie's treatment of Julia, her step daughter, trying to excite him against her. - Spoke in a most disorganizing way to the servants. -
The last visit we paid to Mr Barnwell, Ann spoke in great disgust of Miss Juliet Elliott's malicious style of remark, she said several things calculated to excite them against Charlotte & Heyward. Ann, & her Mother said this did not have that effect, but disgusted them with Juliet. - Poor old woman, a bitter, spiteful temper is a fearful companion. -
25 April
Mr Grimball returned and brought up John, who is now a Midshipman again, with the prospect of being made Master, like the rest of his date, as he resigned when his State did, 2 weeks before his examination, had excellent letters from the Officers who were on board the Macedonian with him 1 of course from the Captain, and an unusual honor, one signed by the other Officers, - he seems to have through all the stirring events of this winter, conducted himself well, & Gov. Pickens who gave him a Lieuts. commission. always behaved well to him. -
He sent his letters to the Secretary of the Navy, at Montgomery, and the reply from Malory was that owing to all the circumstances of the case, it should be presented to the President for consideration, and Gov. Pickens endorsed a letter from John to the same effect. - So the matter stands.
Papa has been arranging a plan for Mrs Butler to reside for the summer at Grass Knowl, a healthy place & belonging to Georgia: Charles having a home there suited to his Plantation. She wrote that she was very much disgusted with her situation, and the annoyance of contending with Mr Butler, who had arrived in Darien to take posession as soon as she left. We hear that she has gone North so suddenly that she had not time to write; if she can live there without any annoyance from owning Southern Property, or rather being supported by it, I think she has done best for herself. For 34 years, ever since her marriage, she had enjoyed a degree of affluence and fashion, there, which must have made her identify herself with the people & with the place. She is now a very stout old woman; & these comforts which she has there must be very dear to her. She has been much separated from her own family, and is accustomed to her luxury, & her loneliness. - I hope she may enjoy the former, all her days, & have the other remedied by the society of her daughter & grandchildren.
24 April
Charles writes to Papa that he has been ill with Dysentry, he was better, and had been so kindly treated by Mr Nightengale and Comodere Tatnel. He says after this his letters are to be directed to Captain Morris. - He is in charge of the Warship. He had a very fine colt at Papa's which in this letter he requested Papa to send to him as he wished to present it to Mr Nightengale. - The colt died just a few days since, and I am sorry for Charles' loss, but I do not think Mr N. would like to accept such a present: as his daughter has refused Charles. -
Mrs Butles had joined a party going North, the journey was to be very long, round by Tenasee. The Cumberland river, Ohio river to Pitsburg in Pennsylvania. -
Mr John Elliott's Father preached for us & gave the Communion on Sunday, the son is a better preacher. - The old gentleman looks stuffy and fading away, as we all are. - The mails are stopped from the North, and consequently we are quite at a loss for news; the last accounts were very warlike, from Maryland there had been a meeting between the people of Baltamore & the troops coming from New York & Pennsylvania, ordered to Washington by Mr Lincoln. Lewis is trying now to get his Company, the St Paul's Rifles to volunteer to go to Virginia in the 1 Regiment, Col. Johnston Petigrew commander. They don't seem so willing, these men, as the Officers & Lewis have been going round the Parish to try and get the complement of men. On Saturday they had 12, including Officers, and they require 45. I don't think they have much chance.
Lewis seems to have been very unsuccessful in his plans up here, he tried raising hogs and finding it would not pay has sold out to some man in the Pineland who I am sure will never pay him, his whole stock for $80. -
8 May
The boat has gone off to Town, and carried our numerous things and some of the servants and Elizabeth, Ella, & Lotty go off on Thursday and we the next day, Lewis takes them down and returns the next day to remain up here until Monday. He is now to be ordered on Coast duty. Bing Smith hopes to be Col. of the Regiment, and Lewis to be Captain, these young men have been all the winter in a state of great expectation and generally disappointed. - I wish they may get something to do, and feel more quiet. The war is arranging its self in and about Washington.
Virginia has Gen. Lee in charge of her forces. There is not a great desire to fly to her aid, in fact we are all to be subjugated and must first secure our honors. Every thing progresses slowly, but after the success of Sumpter, I hope successfully. The points now to be attacked are all in Virginia except Fort Pickens, in Florida. -
This is the 3 winter we have passed in this very comfortable establishment and I am I hope sensible of the very great advantage of this for we formerly lived in a rickity old house; still there was a great deal of happiness there, shewing that being all together & loving each other, secures happiness, independent of wealth. -
We are to dine at Papa's to day, a last meeting for this season. Papa's case seems to progress in the most uncomfortable manner. He had a conversation with Simons at the Agricultural dinner, which he wished Lewis to witness about, and as L. is friendly with Simonds it was not very pleasant. In this talk Papa spoke in a very irritated way to Simons and in consequence of it he had forbidden any negro to pass through the canal, if they do so, he will punish them. - I think if he had been kept at the North his case would have progressed much better, he does not understand about business, and in not conciliating in his manners. -
Charleston, May 1861.
We came down on the 10 the Girls & Lewis the day before. All got down comfortably & found them well in Town. - Since that time the servants have been sick one after another, & I have been quite ailing, the house had to be rearranged to accomodate the family. Papa has the front room on the street, a very comfortable one which he seems to enjoy greatly, his servant, Charles, is with him and he looks better than he did in the country but he is an odd person in his manners. He quite ignores William in the Law case and seems rather vexed with him one can't exactly tell for what. I expect the secret of the whole thing is that my Papa is not very sensible, which he can't help, we are born with an unequal share of mental gifts. -
The boys are all up stairs in 2 rooms 5 of them, a sort of Barack, but they seem comfortable. Lewis is off on an electioneering effort at Whippy Swamp, to get Bing Smith made Col. that he may be Captain, & so go to war. - Heard from Mrs Butler, she had arrived at her comfortable home and seemed very thankful, gave the girls some pretty worked handkerchiefs, & me a lovely wooden butter tub, the top of which got broken in the Packing. - Elizabeth wrote to her, I think she will get along very comfortably there, her affairs seem very much involved. She wishes Papa to let her Mortgage the Money he has given her, 19 thousand dollars, & 10 thousand dollars, to Papa Lewis & James what she owes them. There was a very good crop harvested, & sold, and one never can understand this business. - We have seen Luise North, Marianna Petigru, Mrs C. Manigault, Harriet, Margaret Barnwell, & Ann, Dr Porcher, the Wilkinses, all of them, and are getting into the usual rutine of the summer.
We have not been able to get a pew in St. Michael's Church this summer as yet and may as well give it up. The old lady we generally hire from goes down to the Island and Gen. Boregard objects to people going there as the Island is under Martial law. -
25 May
John went off this morning in the Cecile to join the Lady Davis at Beaufort, he packed up his things in my room, and seemed very much pleased with his position. He got a new trunk, and placed his clothes in good order. When I advised some particular course of conduct he informed me he was 21, and felt quite able to take care of himself. Papa and himself act like red rags on one another.
Lewis has not succeeded in getting his commission, Bing Smith is still Captain, and Lewis Lieutenant, he is in Town and seems desirous of improving himself in his profession. - Arthur is the only one we feel very anxious about just now, the whole family life must greatly surprise Papa. So much ease of intercourse between Parents and children. -
8th June.
Lewis not being able to get a commission determined to go to Virginia as a private and Mr Henry Lesegne gave him a letter to Col. George Deas, & I gave him one, too, as he is my Cousin. Martin gave him a letter to Capn Cuthbert, he went off looking rather grave. It is a serious thing to leave home under such circumstances. He had a fine minie rifle got from Elliott, Captain of William's Company. If any thing happens to the gun it has to be paid for. His pistol a purchase of his own, a blanket, a skin to sleep on which could also answer to keep his knapsack dry. He has joined the Palmeto Guards and hopes to see some service. There seems to be a war spirit abroad with the young men, so many are going to Virginia. -
9th June
Papa went to Somerville to visit Russel Middleton, he returned quite charmed with the place and the good living. - Gov. and Martin dined here last week. Adela is going to have another baby, this will be the 5th it is really terrible. -
Papa is very naive, he told me he was better here than he had been because of his diet at my table. The Market, is high and I pay nearly $2 each day for dinner, when by ourselves it costs me 50¢.
10 June
We got on as usual, the weather is very warm. The war progresses slowly and not always satisfactorily. - Elizabeth had Miss Aiken, the Manigaults to tea, Mrs Vanderhorst & Mrs Wayne. - Mrs V. has given several parties the last very handsome. Miss Adele is the attraction, Mr Arnold the beau, William thinks it promises very fair. A. Vanderhorst has gone to the War, hoping to be made aid to B. Gen. Bee. - There have been sailing parties and Evening parties. -
The news from Virginia is rather warlike, we are all the time kept anxious about the state of affairs but time seems just to strengthen the cause of the South, and make it more probable that we shall succeed. -
I had a visit from Mrs Trenholm yesterday evening and found her very pleasant. She spoke kindly about my sons, said they were so well considered in the community and that Arthur was an honest high toned young man. Mr T. said so & he knew for he had business transactions with him. All this was very pleasant to me. -
June 29
Lewis writes very pleasantly about his campaign in Virginia, I rather think he likes the excitement. His Company have moved forward and form the advance guard of the Southern Army, and this he likes, he would prefer remaining in Virginia to keeping his Commission of Lieutenant.
The St. Paul's Rifles have been ordered to the Coast and are at Clarks Bay where they are not likely to see any service. - John is in Beaufort. -
July 11
Mr Grimball and Papa went into the Country to day, it has been very warm. Lewis writes from Fairfax C. H. on the eve of battle for an over coat for a grey flannel Jacket for woolen socks and crackers & cheese, and says it is quite cold where he is at night and when on guard duty he suffers very much. His usual covering is 2 blankets. -
Papa is going to Buncomb with C. & W. engaged a room and sets off on the 20th. He has given me a barrel of small rice and $50 to buy something for myself. He gave each of the girls, E. & L. $30, & Elizabeth $40, he gave me $50 in change for house keeping & Mr Grimball one hundred bushels of seed rice. All this is to help the living. He gave Lewis money when he went off, and a little bible. - Which was very kind. -
The Wilkinses have had 2 little teas which, as they have a piano went off nicely. - We have had two, the last included Mr & Mrs Lewis, H. Manigault, and a Miss North who sings very well & is very fat & has red hair. She wishes to go to Europe, and be cultivated for a public singer, but cannot get her parents to consent to it, they live on ill terms with each other.
Ann Barnwell took Elizabeth to drive with her yesterday afternoon, and poured out her discontent with life, herself, and all the world to Elizabeth. E. said she had been struck with a remark in a Novel of Thackery's she had lately read, “to a good natured man the world is pleasant and kind, but to one who is misanthropic the world is very crooked and unhappy” so, if she would feel more interest in people they would please her, and she would be happier. -
We have had a constant succession of afternoon visitors, and Papa has been rather struck with it. -
In this dreary world where feeling, except for self, seems no where, it is affecting to hear of such love as this. - Papa went the other day to see Mr Alfred Huger and said he was waiting to go to Buncomb with his daughter Charlotte. He looked at him and his face all alive with feeling said “Morris, is she any thing like the one she was called after.” He assured him his daughter was altogether lovely and of good report. To which Mr Huger replyed“ I have never for one hour had her out of my mind, the pressure of her hand, when she parted with me I still feel, and I would to day, old and crippled as I am, walk a mile to serve any one I thought it would please her that I should. ”
The history of this heart affair is this; when Mr Huger was a young man, he addressed my Mother's sister, Charlotte Manigault, and she loved him, but my Grandmother could not reconcile herself to another of her daughters being, as she said, sacrificed at the South, so she induced Charlotte to refuse him and I think she never got over it, her younger Sister Harriet married, and she attended the death beds of 2 Sisters, and died herself, a victim to consumption. So, in fact, my Grandmother sacrificed her to the North, & I have always felt as if I had been unjustly deprived of a very charming Aunt, for I knew her, & loved her. -And Mr Huger, who really loved her & loves her still, married a woman older than himself, a poor little, dreary soul who had nursed a Sister of this gentleman in a lingering illness, in which the two were brought much in contact, and sympathy, and so a match of propinquity took place. No children, but now in his old age he has in his house the children of a nephew who has lost his wife and with these young people about him, and thinking of his lost Charlotte, life is nearly for him ended. -
I have been quite ill with a pain in my head & stomach. In the years that have passed of my married life I have when ill dragged round after my duties with weak wretched feelings. Many times I have knelt down and said family prayers with a faint heart & swimming head from weakness. Now my children are grown I intend to try the other system, go to bed when I feel badly, and be waited upon, and if I live long enough shall end by pursuing the plan I like best. For the 12 confinements I had: - Motives of economy induced me to only 4 times have a regular nurse, and only twice for a whole Month, the others I had what I could get at home, & the regular nurse here was with me 2 weeks.
I believe now this was a mistake, it was thought that I really did not wish a nurse, and not that I made a sacrifice to what I considered necessary economy. - I recollect now the feeling of nervous misery, when ill, with a baby; a head paining, & the noise of children running up & down stairs, doors slamming, &c., & that restraint which the presence of a stranger in the nurse would have occasioned in my sick room, not there; & the dreary details of expenditure discussed at my bed side. Well, I have had, & now have, many blessings, but were I to begin life again, at such times I would have a nurse & I would nurse myself. -
July 26th
Papa left us for Buncombe on the 24, he went off in a furious annoyance at not being called for before half past eight so he quarreled with the hack man, I am glad he has gone, for his rigid ways became disagreeable. We did as well as we could for him, & I believe he was satisfied with his visit. - The Grand Northern Army left Washington, horse foot and flying artillery, Regulars, & Volunteers, and sang jubilant airs along the road. A strategic movement on the part of the Southerners brought them on to Bull Run, where the forces were ready to meet them, and where there was a dreadful battle. Loss on both sides and the Northern Army completely routed, all their Batteries taken and some thousands mowed down. Gen. Bee fell Mortally wounded, sustaining a desperate assault. Col. Johnston fell soon after he reached the battle, Bauregard was there, Gen. Johnston took the colors of a wavering Company, and led them to the attack. Jeff Davis was on the field, and in short it was a glorious victory.
Today there is a grand Military Funeral for Bee & Johnston & Gen. Bartow who also was killed in the fight goes through to Savannah. -
May the Almighty Protect us and make us thankful. -
This battle was fought on Sunday. - Charles paid a nice little visit here and looked so well and in such good spirits I was delighted to see him, - We have not heard from Lewis since the battle.
The ladies are all as busy as possible forming themselves into relief societies for the wounded soldiers, and also to prepare clothing for them in the winter, which will soon now approach. We have some work to do, 10 long shirts for sick men. Papa gave the money for the cloth and Charlotte gave $10 & Mr Grimball $5.
28 July
The accounts from the battle continue to come in, and the Southerners seem to have behaved with the greatest courage and their Officers most successfully. -
There were services in the Church to day to return thanks for the Victory. - We understand The Palmetoe Guard, Lewis's Company, repulsed a regiment and acted in the most approved style of valor. -
Charles gave me an unhappy account of Richard, he seems to lead a dreary lonely life, and manage very badly. -
10 August
We heard from Lewis, a full account of his fatigue & the Victory. Henry Middleton, a private in Hampton's Legion was Mortally wounded during the fight, since dead, a great lose to his family. He managed all the Large Planting interest brought home and interrod at the Magnolia.
The Town since the Battle has been divided into societies for the Relief of the Wounded & Clothing for the troops. Elizabeth belongs to both. Miss Hayne requested me to be one of the managers to the Aid Society which I declined, but we made some long hospital shirts and when they were sent to Miss Hayne, 10 of them, she said they were very nice and afterwards meeting Elizabeth on the Batery said they were the best sent to them & should be ticketed for “Officers”. It is amusing for when we made them we all said as we sewed this is for a Col. &c. &c. E. goes to Miss Drayton's twice a week to cut & to sew I think she will learn to sew &c which she does not know much about. Mr Grimball applied to Gov. Pic for a Commission for Lewis and got an answer to day, he could not offer him anything but an Assistant Sergeant's Place. I don't know if Lewis will accept it. -
19 August
Things go on very successfully. The Southern forces have beaten the Union Army in the West. William was made one of the prize commissioners and went to North Carolina to see after a prize. He placed seals on it and took possession and returned home, - rather a fatiguing journey to Beaufort on the Coast. Since his return the Governor of N. C. has taken possession, too, so the matter has to be decided in Court. W. might get 1 or 2 hundred dollars for his work: - perhaps he will only have his expenses paid. There is much fever all over the Country now, and also in the City, Typhoid. The accounts from the Army are that 20 thousand troops are ill & wounded &c., and that the South Carolina troops are the worst provided & the North Carolina the best. The Counties are assessed in that State & the men provided in that way. There was a sad accident on Sulivan's Island, Mr Tom Porcher trying to save his niece while bathing was drowned, also the young lady, Miss Ellen White, 14 years old. -
Papa writes that he has been suffering from his gout. -
24 August
Received a letter yesterday from Lewis he hopes to soon get home & accepts thankfully the Commission of Assistant Surgeon in the State Forces, and in reply to Arthur's wish to go out to Virginia if in no other way as a private, says he had better not, for it is the life of a Hound, and now unless they enlist for the War, recieve no pay and have to support themselves. We hired a carriage the other afternoon and paid some visits. We paid $3 and fortunately got through 8 in the upper part of the Town, Miss Nowels, Miss Mazike, Mrs Hayne, Mrs Taber, Mrs Alice Heyward, Mrs Trenholm, Miss Turnbull, Miss Mitchel. - We shall after a while have to get it again.
Lotty is learning to draw this summer and seems to like it better than Music. - Ella & herself have a nice set of friends. -
There has been quite a flare up in Mrs Wilkinses' family, the poor things do so want a ruling principle, every one does as he or she pleases, and they all are self indulgent, and indolent, in short badly brought up. Gov. has got himself into a miserable trouble, quareled with his father in law, his wife, an adopted child and has a large and increasing family. She, Adela, is one of the self indulgent ones, and must go to Greenville every summer, leave him to annoy his Mother & sisters.
His little daughter died at Grahamville, little Eliza, from neglect. Adela was ill at the time. He rules at his Mother's, is rude to his Sisters and induces Martin to be so, too, they all had a war talk and are now better friends. In my family, the Morises, they often quareled, but they always made up. The Wilkins's are very rigid people and can't forget they have through the ill management of Berkley Wilkins & Gov brought into non intercourse with the Taber concern & the T. Lowndes. I think people ought never to quarrel with any one.
1 September
Lewis arrived from Virginia and went up that night to see about his Commission. He returned yesterday, having been obliged to wait several days to see the Governor. He had companions, for there were many there waiting for the same purpose. He returned having received his Commission he is to apply to the Surgeon General or some such person and then he will go some where. I think upon the whole it is the best, as he will be in the line of his profession. -
He looks well and upon the whole I think it has not injured him. He says it was the life of a hound and all the evil selfish feelings brought out. In this Palmetoe Guard one day Capn Cuthbert would be very pleasant & easy with the men and soon after, like a raging lion. Many shirked duty, lied, stole, and others had to work all the time because they stayed in Camp and were quiet, many of the flourishing tales we heard of prowes on the battle field were made up for home. What poor creatures we all are!
Heard from Papa he says Charles writes to him. Judge Law wrote to Mrs Butler she must come South. P. Butler is in Fort Lafayete New York Harbour, a prisoner. Mr Wharton her Phila lawyer is also in prison. Julian McAllister is promoted to be Captain in the U.S. forces. Mrs McAllister is with her Mother with her 2 younger children. - Ann Barnwell has an admirer in Lionel Nowel he is a clerk, gets 15 hundred a year & is said to be a very gentlemanly man.
The Troops are said to be still suffering from fevers, &c., in Virginia. The Hospitals I expect are under the charge of inexperienced Surgeons. After the Battle we heard that the legs and arms were sawed off and thrown out of doors & windows and many lives lost from ignorance. Lewis has brought home a Dressing Gown taken from a Yankee's trunk a pistol a bowy knife a picture of a little Yankee girl.
After a great many delays Lewis got his appointment and the next day at 7 o'clock went off to Cole's Island where some troops are stationed. We fixed him up and now it is proposed that Lewis should to applied for a Confederate appointment from Walker. - Mr Grimball is to write a letter to that effect I suppose nothing will come of it but one can but try. - Striving is the appointed way. - We made 4 calico shirts for Lewis and fixed him up as well as we could. We have constant rains now. Lewis said with regard to the Camp life that men did there what they would be ashamed to do at home.
15 September
Heard from Lewis he is satisfied finds a friend in one of the Lieutenants, Tatum, an old schoolmate from Abeville has one hundred and 50 men under his charge and a very good Hospital Steward who saves him much trouble. The letters to Walker are not answered, one from Elizabeth to Mrs W. who was an old friend at school.
The Marion Artilary have been ordered down to Sulivan's Island. Martin who is now Lieutenant & Berkley W. are with this Company, B. as Commissary they seemed to like it very much. Martin had to purchase a sword and gave in this time of scarcity for an Army sword $40. - the usual price it $15 $20 with belt & chains. The war progresses very slowly and as yet it looks very dark and endless. A must trust in the Good God who has protected us so far. -
19 Sep
My dear Lotty has had an attack of fever now for 3 or 4 days Dr Geddings says Typhoid which is always lingering. She is the most patient child never says a word and takes her medicine and is still. -
Oct 2
Lewis had a flare up with the Cap of his new position, North Edisto, and like a foolish boy gave up his Commission. This distressed Mr Grimball very much and he persuaded himself that if Lewis had time to reconsider this step he would repent. So he got the Department to allow it to remain until Lewis could be communicated with. We have not heard from Lewis, since. But suppose he has determined to remain the pay is 13 hundred & $20 a year. The post is very out of the way and Lewis did write but his letter was lost by the young man with his own papers the boat having swamped. -
Lotty is better she had the fever 14 days is now up & better. -
October 19
Mrs Butler was written to by her Lawyer and came from the North by the way of Washington where she got a permit from Gen. Scott, was forwarded to Fortress Monroe and from thence to Norfolk where she arrived with a Flag of Truce. She left Cornelia at School at the North. She looks very well is thinner than she was and still very handsome, expects to go to Georgia the last of the Month to be there perhaps to the end of the war.
Things seem to go on so slowly, and are so ruinously low and high that I suppose at the end of it we shall be in a deplorable state. I think it was all right to sepparate from the North but to us as a family it was just ruin. -
The Northern property was then sold, and we were about to realize something from it the prices last Fall were very high, & now this is all over and the attainment of positions are so difficult the boys have nothing to do now apart from the war.
John is a Lieutenant, which he greatly enjoys, but William & Arthur are much in need of Commissions they belong to Militia Companies they do not pay except on service. The regular companies always pay & always have something to do, such a young man as William seems to deserve all distinction, but it is not easily got. - How dreary life is & how sinful we are. -
There have been some interesting speeches in Court, about the sequestration of property of alien enemies, Mr Pettegrew Nelson Mitchel on our side and others against their view. -
Mrs Butler is at the Mills House & has dined here twice & spends all her evenings with us. Her daughter is at her place at the North. - near Philadelphia. She comes on to secure her property. After spending 3 weeks here she went on to Savannah and had her business arranged to her satisfaction.
The Yankee fleet attacked Hilton Head and Bay Point silenced the Batteries there and are now in Broad River. The poor Beaufort people fled in every direction, leaving the Town to be sacked by the negroes. The Batteries were abandoned it is now thought too soon and as is always the case where there is a failure it is considered mismanaged. Gen. Drayton, Trapier & Ripley & Lee has come on from Virginia to take charge. Troops have come from North Carolina to assist, and they are waiting to protect the Rail Road. The Women were seized with a perfect panic and many fled into the interior, such terror stricken creatures disgrace their Revolutionary Ancestry. William, Berkley & Arthur are with their Company encamped at the Race Ground every day or two they come in and I see them. John paid us a visit and it was charming to see him he has been away all the Summer. Berkley is not very enthusiastic about Military affairs, and finds the camp life perfectly horrible. It is very amusing to hear him recount his annoyances, damp hay to lie on, & such a hard bed, was in a nice mess, but did not know how to arrange paying his share, got some tea & sugar to put in and went off rather pleased. Charles has been passing the Summer at Savannah in the same house with Miss Emma & Miss Clem Wallister and not long since he offered himself to Miss Clem was accepted & engaged 3 days when Miss C. found out she loved another Charley & not Charley Morris so C. came here with Mrs Butler, & having business in Savannah returned there and having a conversation with Miss Emma again reconciled himself to Miss Clem & arrived here in a state of great beatitude was now engaged & to be married on Wednesday 20 Nov. On the 15 a telegram arrives telling him to come to Savannah & then another to come on alone so we are all in a maze fearing Miss Clem has again pranced off and Charles went off yesterday & was in Savannah at 8 this morning. He is so crazy to get married it is quite ridiculous. Ella says when Clem first pranced off Charles having just recovered from an attack of fever was terribly nervous & Miss Emma & herself had to administer nervines to him and sustain his sinking spirits & on one occasion when Miss Emma left the room he said he thought it was a pity he had not addressed Miss Emma. Last summer Richard who is here told Ella Charles felt himself very near dying and told R. if that happened he must give all his effects to Mrs Nightingale which highly insenced Mrs B. who has always been very kind to C. She says at any rate she would keep the things she had in charge the Nightingales should not have them. - Richard looks very well & is very agreeable, he is stouter & improved in appearance. Papa & Mr Grimball came to Town on a visit, both looking well & reporting all quiet and going on as usual. We are to stay here for the present. Mr Grimball will be on the Plantation keeping the negroes together & I taking care of the girls, the boys in the tented field: -
The Yankees have not made much progress, a Flag of truce came from the fleet to one of the Batteries and one of the Officers said they had no wish to disturb quiet & loyal Citizens, the reply given by Captain 0 Barnwell was there were no such about there. Mr Edward Barnwell has his nephew Cap W. Barnwell, the son of the Rev. Mr Barnwell at his house desperately wounded by accident by a pistol said to be a very clever young man. His Mother & Sisters are with him a very sad case. Arthur made $51 in the Medical Director's office which enabled him to purchase with others a tent. John is in Wapoo with his Davis. - John is now here with his Davis quite busy & happy. Charles has married Miss McAllister and brought her here, Clementina, as she chooses to be called. A woman of the world, of good family & in peace times would have 40 thousand dollars. Has red hair a good figure & add is a sensible educated woman, quite accustomed to society and will manage Charles & take care of his money & make him very happy. Mr Grimball writes that Pinebury is a Military Station and seems to be having an interesting time there entertaining the Officers. - There is a detatchment of Cavalry on the lawn, 2, 6 pounders at the Bain landing, a bridge of Flats accross the river.
I think we are in dark & trying times, and I am afraid. The people of the Sea board so loud in their expressions of determination while the war is in Virginia feel very faint now that it has come upon us. The Yankees have landed on Tybee & put up the Flag, so these two States, Georgia & South Carolina have now the Flag of the enemy floating on their coasts. In Florida they have Brag to Fight it out on the Coast, Pensicola fortunately for them Gen Drayton & Trapier are not men to be depended on, they have not heads to command. Gen. Lee, who was thought slow, & said to be a grand General he is superior over all.
The Camp seems to be a nice place William, who has lost his watch a gift from me (I think through carelessness) says they live very well in his mess. He looks very well indeed.
Dec. 5
The war goes on and the panic which took possession of the Town and caused people to rush off in great haste to the interior, Columbia, Edgefield, &c, has rather subsided. Old Mr Matthews finding that the Yankees landed 7 miles from him burned down his Mill, his negro houses, his crop, his sons' negro houses and crop. It is said he was in rather an excited state . The poor Edisto Planters have met with great loss & annoyance. We are on the Frontier and Mr Grimball intends making some arrangements about the provisions and negroes but still hopes to plant the crop. -
19 Dec.
There has been a terrible fire in Town and a destruction of 4 Churches, the Circular, the Catholic Cathedral, and St Peter's & a Methodist Church & the Quaker Meeting. Many fine houses destroyed and great distress. The fire broke out in a sash & blind factory and the difficulty of getting water and the previous drought and a very high wind which drove the flames caused the general destruction. This fire began at Cooper River and burnt across the City to Ashley River, the Institute Hall, St Andrews Hall, the Savings bank, & Art Museum, all destroyed, many of our friends have been sufferers, among them the Reids. Mr R. is a very kind man, and has often been amiably interested in our affairs, and now in his old age he has been deprived of his home, he is the President of the Bank of South Carolina. -
The fire burnt from 9 o'clock one night to the afternoon of the next day.
The boys have been ordered off on duty as far as John's Island. Mr Grimball paid us a visit to condole with his friends, & see the destruction. Mrs Butler & Charles & Clementina have gone off to pay a visit to Georgia on business, Mrs B. intends now going to Papas for a visit, and to save money, which with her is getting rather scant. - The expenses of the property are immense and this year the prices were small. The night of the fire Mrs Butler, Charlotte, Clementina, Charles & ourselves sat up and the piaza was crowded with baggage from the Miles house. My 5 sons were in Town from the Camp at the Race Grounds on guard duty & I felt very glad they were here. Lewis was up from the fort and John from his vessel. Lewis is up to day his situation is a strange one he has an appointment from Pickens and is now notified that he will not be paid or recognised he has to go to Richmond to be examined he is not well and it is very annoying these are the ups & downs in this world. I feel as if I should never get over the fright of the fire and the expected bombardment of the Town, my things are all packed up, in trunks and bags and our silver is sent to the Bank at Camden for safety. - Mr Reid had that arranged for us. - The drought continues, and the alarms of fire are frequent. -
27 December
Xmas has passed we had a quiet time and enjoyed a Turkey a ham and a plum pudding with the Girls Harry & John. The Wilkinses declined dining with us and I felt rather provoked at it. Lewis came from the country quite sick and has since been under treatment Dr Giddings attending. He says this has been a long time coming on & Lewis thinks it began in Virginia, where he was very much exposed.
February 1862.
Lewis has recovered after an illness of 3 weeks. We nursed him faithfully and people were very kind in asking about him, he has now passed his examination before the board here & is waiting for orders, in the meantime has gone in the country to pay a visit to his friend Sinclair, on the 10th he will receive his orders. John has had two bilious attacks, now better. Charles and Clementina gone to Savannah where he is now on duty & her brothers are there too. Mr Grimball has paid several visits to the City & brought Adam down to assist in nursing Lewis. - We were fortunate that Lewis went before this board, for Dr Giddings was one of the Surgeons and when it was through and Lewis had left the room with the intimation that he was to return the next day to be informed how he stood they called him back and told him he had passed, this I think he owed to the kindness of Dr Giddings, who knew how ill he had been. We have reason to be very thankful for all this and I hope now he will earnestly devote himself to his profession. -
John is here in charge of the Lady D, & the Gun boat: he would rather be in Savannah where there is a prospect of some service. -
27th Feb.
All the boys except W. are now out again, B & A joined the Marion Artillery and Lewis the 1 Regiment Infantry as Assist Surgeon quite distinguished with his uniform &c. William still unfixed. Lotty and Ella & Harry have had the Measles are now better. Things are very dark just now & for ourselves ruin seems pretty certain. The whole Country seems to be abandoned to the enemy and the troops are to be concentrated in Charleston & Savannah. The Episcopal Churches are open for prayer and we have had in succession two fast days last Friday and this. Thy will be done is the prayer and when we really feel so there is some comfort. John is in Savannah in command of 5 guns living in a Flat and highly delighted with his situation.
The Militia of the City was disbanded and is still in an unorganized state. William has applied for a regular Commission, and is still uncertain of getting it. Berkley & Arthur joined the Marion Artillery as the most agreeable Company being composed of gentlemen. -
I dare not think of the consequences or this war, our ruin and the loss of my brave boys but we are sadly in earnest, and I pray we may succeed. -
6th March
We are now in the midst of a great calamity 84 of Mr Grimball's negroes went off all together to Edisto we think of course they are the best. Mr Grimball is quite unstrung by it. Fortunately Berkley can come to him and William is still out of Military position and they both can be with him. We shall perhaps remove from the City and Berkley has gone to look for a place in Anderson, or Pickens, to remove to with the remnant of the negroes. I hope Mr Grimball will be sustained through this heavy trial. John & Lewis are in good positions, Lewis gets 13 hundred dollars & John $15 hundred a year which supports them.
I was very much touched this morning by a visit from my Uncle, Mr Charles Manigault who offered me the use of a house of his with 8 rooms as long as I needed it free of rent. This was entirely unexpected.
8th March
Mr Grimball & W came down yesterday with the people remaining, they are lodged in the Jail or work house.
My poor husband finds himself terribly tired by his situation & I really think without God's mercy he would sink entirely under it.
Mr James Rose the President of the Rail Road Bank told Papa I might draw on his bank for the sum which is due to me and Papa must write to Harry to deposit the Money in the Bank of England. This was another unexpected kindness.
25 March
John wrote to his father & to me offering the use of his Confederate Bonds and 9 hundred dollars of his pay which is very kind. - I hope Mr Grimball may not be obliged to use it. Berkley made a visit to Pickings & Anderson and found it impossible to procure a suitable place. Mr Kirckland, the Methodist Missionary who resided in our neighborhood offered to rent us his house furnished to put the negroes out to service, to come for the family and proved his sincere goodness in every way. Berkley has such offers of kindness from Mr Paul Felder of land rent free that he went to Orangeburg but did not succeed.
Mr Robertson the factor offered to let Mr Grimball send his negroes to his plantation, he giving the 4th they made and paying his brother for looking after them. The place is 22 miles from Town and the land poor & the accomodations a barn and Overseer's house. The plan although not a promising one was being acted on. Mr Aiken offered his vessel to carry the negroes to this place when Professor Porcher sent a letter round with an offer from Mr Duboise Porcher to take the negroes and have them work for their food and clothes. They were all brought from the work house 1, Dick, with Typhoid fever. We have been very much tired with the nursing, Elizabeth & I sit up every night until 12 to give medicine & nourishment. Dick is better but Nat has caught the fever from him and is now quite ill and we have the prospect of a time nursing him. Troubles never come alone & we are now in the midst of many. Mr G. had trouble in selling his corn & M. W. Pringlee the Quarter Master wrote up to the man in Adams Run to take the corn by force at 1.10¢ when all over the Country they were offering 1.50. This letter was shown to Mr Grimball -
1 April
Mr G. has been wonderfully relieved by the placing the negroes with Mr Porcher and is now in the country selling his rice. The Dr has left Nat and I hope they will soon be well enough to go to the country. I feel dull and anxious.
There was a stampede 66 negroes from Combahee the other day 3 hundred from one of the Blakes Walter.
May 12
We are now in a great state of excitement, all the low country getting into the upper country. Flying from our Ruthless foes, we expect an attack and people are leaving their houses and families, servants and furniture, crowding up to the Rail Road. The upper districts are crowded with this unusual population and food is not abundant or cheap. The people in many instances take advantage of this state of things and put a great price on their houses refusing to rent but choosing to sell. Papa came from the country in wretched health and after remaining with us 3 weeks went with Mrs Butler to Spartanburg and there intend spending the summer. We have since heard of all his Bonyhab negroes going off and some of the Mount Hope. I expect they will all go. He is very weak and can hardly stand this state of things. -
Mr Grimball went to Darlington to look for a place to put his negroes and to stay himself but saw nothing very satisfactory. A farm of 150 acres 15 miles from the Rail Road and a house in the sand hill near Darlington Court House. - He then went to Aiken and could not get fixed there it seemed too near the enemy. - We are now trying in Spartanburg, the last thing proposed was to take with Mrs Barnwell the Cherokee Springs for 1 thousand dollars for a year, Mrs B. paying 500. & we paying 500. Mrs Wilkins dividing our part with us. Mr Grimball went up to arrange it if possible. I do not feel at all certain about it for he might now refuse to rent it to us for that sum. -
The Town is nearly deserted by the Inhabitants, there are some soldiers in it and the poor creatures will soon suffer from the effects of the climate, people look forward to a terrible summer. I feel perfectly dispondent at times but there is no use in that we must bear it as well as we can. Since the Fall of New Orleans and the Giving up of Nolfork I expect to hear of all sorts of dreadful things and it will be only necessary for the Gun boats to come here to have them take possession of the Town. - La!
16th May Spartanburg St John's College left wing.
Mr Grimball moved us up here last week we hired a car for $75 and brought some furniture and all our clothes and some bedding and have established ourselves here, we hope only for the summer but it may be longer.
The Journey was performed comfortably and we had to remain 2 days at the Hotel as our things were not taken out. Papa & Mrs B. were there and our rooms were ready. We thankfully left it on Monday for I hate a Hotel life and we are now as comfortably fixed as circumstances will allow. The building is not entirely finished we have the use of 2 large rooms, up stayrs, and a turret room large enough for Harry to sleep in, there are down stayrs 3 rooms and one a very large one which we make by using screens left here, a pantry, dining room, and drawing room. The supply of articles of food excentric, and as yet no appearance of any quantity.
Mr Wilkins came up with her daughters soon after us, she declined sharing with us the college as she said the accomodation for the servants would not answer. They have two large kitchens, and one very large room which has the two ends cut off for Josey & Adam & their wives, and Patsy & Peggy & the 5 children sleep in the middle of the Hotel as Peggy calls it. Mrs Wilkinses servants came here at first and it was very crowded, and rather noisy. Maria, a little girl they had in the house died here, she was very ill when she left Charleston and might have died in the cars. Mrs W. hired some rooms for her servants, and they have moved away. She is at the Walker House with her daughters they find it not nice, every one complains. - Most people stay a few days and then locate themselves, she is trying to do so. -
Mr Grimball had a very sudden and violent attack the other night and I sent for Dr Boyed, he sent me a powder to administer morphyne, and said he had a very sick child, and no one to leave it with. I prefered he should see Mr Grimball, and sent in a servant to take charge of the child, he after a time came up here and prescribed. The attack he said was gravel, he cupped Mr Grimball and with the Morphyne he was relieved. He went to Charleston to day, intending to see Dr Geddings. -
The boys write pleasantly from the Marions, William has been disappointed in getting a Commission, John is on board the Arkansas the Confederate Ram on the Mississippi. -
Up here there are no outside shutters and we have to hang curtains to all the windows, and in my room there are the white curtains I had soon after I was married, nailed up to the windows. - I hope Mr Grimball will soon come back. Papa and Mrs Butler propose coming up here and joining us in house keeping. I hope it will act pleasantly and lessen our expense.
Just before we left Town Mr Rose notified me he had received $1360 for me, it is kept in his bank until called for that is a little sum in reserve I hope we may be able to get on. -
June 25
Mr Grimball still in Town but expected to day, he sent me a letter from Mary Wilcocks about Mrs McAllister, Mrs Butler's daughter. Her health is in such a critical state that it was thought proper to inform her Mother. She was dreadfully distressed, and at once said she would be glad to go on to the North to see her daughter. - Mr Grimball will go with her to Richmond to get her through. - if possible. This breaks up our pleasant housekeeping, but I am very glad we are here and able to have Papa with us, for he is very feeble, and much changed by his troubles and his age. -
Mr Wilkins is fortunate in getting a small house containing 4 rooms for $15 per Month where she will live with her daughters more comfortably, and she thinks more reasonably, than boarding. -
Gabriella and Charlotte were confirmed in Charleston just before we left there and last Sunday it being Communion Sunday I had the great comfort of having my 3 daughters with me partaking of that Sacrament. - I pray that they may earnestly walk in a Christian life.
The Battle near Richmond is a glorious victory for us we have met with great losses in the lives of valuable young men but this with the signal repulse on James Island are very telling in shortening the war. - Letters from Mr Grimball from Richmond, Mrs Butler still there hoping to get through. The Rail Road had been torn up and if she succeeds in getting through she will have to ride two days in a carriage to Fredricksburg. -
We are getting on here well enough I think now we need not have left Charleston at all, but the Change will be of great service to all of us and already has done Gabriella a great deal of good. William has made another unsuccessful effort to obtain a Commission that way to distinction is evidently closed to him, and we may just as well reconcile ourselves to it. I feel very anxious about John, he wrote to his Father asking for money and was sent a letter containing $50. which he never received and as he was put to inconvenience by it we are quite annoyed. -
He was at Atlanta Georgia getting Ordinance stores for the Gun Boat. -
23 July
We have heard from John, he has been through a severe fight in the Arkansas and was unhurt.
There is a Mrs Stevens up here who is the wife of the 1 Lieutenant on board the Arkansas & we have seen her. She sent me word she had just lost her Mother and was not visiting, but would be glad to see me. I went there with Mrs Irwin and found a very graceful educated woman. She has no children and is very anxious to join her husband. Yesterday she wrote me a note enclosing a telegram from her husband saying John was well. This was the second note she has written to me about letters &c received from her husband. -
We pay $40 per Month for this East Wing of the St John's College. Papa stays with us & has the use of the 3 rooms down stayrs a stable for his horse and the waiting of his man & his maid. This last was brought up here to please her husband Adam and he pays $40 per Month at the Walker House he payed 38 but Charles was boarded had a room & much command of scraps here he shares with our servants and they have daily 10 quarts of Meal & Clabber for breakfast & soup for dinner made of half a Cow head we get them from Market for 10¢ a piece. Our Cow which cost us $24 is quite a comfort she has a calf and grazes in the enclosure 75 acres with Mrs Irwin's Cows & is fed with mash and husks morning and evening. The Calf is kept up and ensures her return. -
Elizabeth teaches Lotty & Harry, and through her kindness they are not left in perfect ignorance. I am afraid it tries her temper greatly. There is a State Institution near this Village for the Blind & Deaf & Dumb. We visited it and were pleased with the exercises. Mr Grimball is now here dull & miserable at the prospects of the family for the future when the money we have now is spent what will become of us. I hope we will be provided for, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
Elizabeth hears from Clementina she says “Our pay has been reduced and still I put up every Month a treasure for Charles, he says he walks up and down his room and thinks of the sums he has squandered on trinkets” &c, &c. -
We are 3 quarters of a mile from the Village and can easily walk there, we go to Church on Sunday. Papa drives me there but he is now disgusted with the Services being irregular, and that the people the Vestry, have refused Mr Hunter the priviledge of preaching, saying he is a Yankee, (which is true,) and that he is trying to get the place from Mr McCollock who is the Clergyman, he is to preach one Sunday here, & 1 at Union. Mr Hunter had a Church on Santee & a Planting interest which he sold out, - and while he was allowed to preach here alternated with Mr McCollock. -
Mrs Hunter is a very pretty & agreeable woman we have seen her often. -
The Repulse of the enemy on James Island in which the Sumpter Guards played so conspicuous a part and in which Captain King, Mrs Sue Petigrue husband was killed & Lieutenant Edwards and several others, - was a very great matter. The Yankees seem now to have given up the idea of attacking Charleston. The Victories before Richmond and the success of the Arkansas at Vicksburg all make one hope the war will not now be long & the cotton famine in England seems slowly & surely progressing. We have some brave Partisan Officers Col Morgan is now in Kentucky ravaging the Yankee stores & taking little Towns. -
30th July
This morning a letter was received from Baltamore to Mrs. Butler announcing her daughter's death on the 30th of June at New Port very suddenly. Mrs. Butler was then in Richmond. I am glad she vvent on for she will be better satisfied. We suppose she was at her own house at Norwood near Philadelphia with her Grand children- Elizabeth was a beautiful spoiled child and always seemed a very strong and healthy person, her death so young is a terrible affliction to her Mother. -
Mrs. Stevens the wife of John's 1 Lieutenant has been very kind in getting her husband to join John's name with his in the Telegrams he sends and she always lets me see them. I feel very much her kindness and we went yesterday to thank her and found her at home looking very sad she has no children. - and would like to join her husband.
5 August
Mrs. Stevens wrote me a note yesterday morning to say that she had permission from her husband to join him at Vicksburg and she would be glad to take letters or a parcel for John so we all wrote letters made them in a packet and gave them to her for she came in the afternoon to see us. This morning she went off on her long journey to reach her husband. I hope she will get there safe, and find them well. I showed her the Ambrotypes of my 5 eldest sons & introduced her to John. -
We were all very much delighted a few days since by getting a letter from William announcing his change to Fort Sumpter he had received a Commission from Richmond as 2nd Lieutenant in the Calhoun's Artillery, we had given up all expectation of W's getting any thing and I am very glad for us all and particularly for his sake. - There had been so many applications for him and all had so entirely failed. The last was in the Sharp Shooters his name was put down by Gen Evens but the Major's Bing Smith was one made interest to have his name taken off and a friend of their own put in the place. This was a very disagreeable thing and we all felt worried by it, but now if his health is good in our climate there is always a terrible risk in a change and fever seems to lurk in every place. I feel very anxious about him & John. We sent down his trunk and as in this out of the way place there is no express. Adam was sent to Columbia to put the trunk, and a parcel containing the sheets and the key of the trunk in the express, it cost $5. 50 the whole thing. -
19 August
We have received a long letter from John giving an account of the 3 engagements in which he was in the Arkansas they were most brilliant and the vessel did wonderfully for the Machinery evidently was not of sufficient force to make the vessel effective. The Majestic way in which she moved was as fast as she could go. The end of this was naturally the destruction of the vessel. We are now most anxious to hear from John he sent us a drawing of the vessel and which he wishes photographed and we saw by the Papers that the last engagement of the poor Arkansas ended in her being blown up by her own crew they all escaped to the shore. -
Mr & Mrs Vanderhorst are up here for change of air they remained a few days in the Village spent an evening with us, were at the Palmetoe house, and then to the Cherokee Springs. Arnoldus Vanderhorst has had a duel with Alfred Rhett, neither of them hurt, the bench of honor managing the affair.
23 August
On Tuesday 19 August after Tea, John came to us, having a furlough, to get his clothes. He traveled a long way, and it was a great comfort to see him, but he only remained with us 2 days, he has gone through many perils, and is unhurt, but he returns to the Battery, where he is stationed at Vicksburg, and is very much exposed to the climate. - I felt dreadfully at parting with him, but these are times of such miserable anxiety and there are such family losses, that we have a sort of stunned and bewildered feeling, as if we were all struggling on some dusty tiresome road, and had at long intervals a pleasant meeting, and then our friends passed on, more quickly, and we lost sight of them. The war seems to be as far from its end as ever, and what is to become of us, should it continue?
Mr & Mrs Vanderhorst stopped here on their way to the Rail Road. Arnoldus was with them he is an unmannerly young man and just now looks miserably having been sick in Virginia. -
About 3 weeks since, Heyward Manigault paid us a visit of a week occupying Mrs Butler's room next to Papa's. He was very quiet and seemed pleased. Charlotte has written to Elizabeth from Greenville where they are passing the summer that he was very much pleased with his visit and found us very comfortably fixed. He is thinking of establishing himself in Greenville moving his negroes and selling out at Wiltown. -
Mr Lewis has come up to look for a place to move his negroes & to fix his family. -
Heyward was very kind in getting me some chimneys for the lamp we burn, in Greenville & sending them by the Stage, - they fit very nicely & got here quite safe. -
Mr Grimball has bought for William and for Arthur pants up here of domestic cloth very good & sent them down. John took for Mrs Stevens a large bundle for her son, such a one as I should not like to impose upon any one for it took up so much room in his trunk and he was not able to put in his blanket and hope he did not thereby lose it. -
Miss Becky Carson came to see Ella Lotty & asked the 3 girls to tea. They went and found it very pleasant. Miss Legg called to see them, Mrs Davidson visited us & Mrs McBeth and we have seen something of Abbe Smith, these last are Refugees like ourselves. William & Wharing Mikell came up here to see their Mother & Wh's wife they paid us a visit and told us about the boys, Lewis's Col, Dunavent, is court Marshaled for drunkeness and is in Town to be tried, L thinks of Joining Ferguson's Company of Artillery to go to Tennessee. William they had seen, he lives at the Fort very comfortably, by their account, Lee keeps a Table d'hote at the Fort, and they all eat with him, - paying $15 per Month.
Ripley became so Morose when he got to Virginia, that his aids generally resigned. - We have not heard from John but Orders have reached here for him to join the Baltic in Mobile. I am always anxious about him. - August has passed and here is September with no great change in our affairs. - We have no reason to be very much discontented just now we have many comforts, and are well, but the anxiety about absent exposed members of the family continues all the time. William does not write in a way to make one feel happy, he seems disappointed, and that is not pleasant. - Arthur got his pantaloons which were sent to him. Berkley writes in a quiet resigned spirit, which is rather soothing, and Lewis in an affectionate way about his brothers, which we all like Arthur in good spirits, about what surrounds him. -
September 2
Elizabeth devotes all her mornings to teaching Lotty & Harry and in so doing tires herself very much and in the case of Harry is conferring a benefit most thankfully received. I know no one so cultivated and elegant in her manners as Elizabeth, or accomplished, she has a disciplined, and highly improved mind, and is the help to her parents & her brothers & sisters, and the adorning attraction to the family circle.
Gabriella is trying earnestly to cultivate herself, and I am afraid labours too hard to attain her object. She is graceful and elegant looking & posesses a natural cleverness of expression, very admirable, but her morbid feelings are the cause of much unhappiness to herself. Lotty will be very handsome when she is fully developed and through E's care she will be a cultured & elegant young woman. - Harry is naturally clever but is not steady enough to do very hopefully. -
Ann Smith & Mrs Eddings came to see us yesterday afternoon & Juliett Eddings, Miss Atkinson from the other Wing came in to tell us good bye she is going to pass some time with her Sister, Mrs Dozier the wife of Lieutenant D who has a house in Charleston. -
September 5
There are great successes to our arms in Virginia and I fear great losses. Mrs Irwin our landlady came in after tea to tell us of it a very kind hospitable woman quite a register of family events in the society which surrounds her, but although she narrates well and accurately and takes one through the lives of those she talks of from the cradle to the tomb the perfect ignorance about these people, except from what she says makes one take no sort of interest in them, it is just simply life & death. - Dr Whiteford Smith who is the President of the Colledge up here paid us a visit yesterday morning, and made me feel pleasantly all day. A clever, good, genial man, his only son is now with the Army, and he told us they had felt anxious to get warm clothes for him, and his wife a great contriver, had taken the checked flannel out of a large cloak of his and made some shirts for him, he bought a thick great coat, and intended going to Virginia to see his son and give him these warm clothes. The young man is just 18, and said he wished to take his share in this struggle and not have it said to him when the independance was achieved that he was enjoying what he had not worked for. -
Dr Smith thinks the war will be a great benefit to the country, enlargement of mind to very ignorant, contracted, country people. The families of soldiers now take news papers, and if they can't read themselves they get people to read to them, and some of them have learned to read themselves. One woman in his neighborhood whose husband, a hard working man and gone off to the wars, had learnt to write & read writing since her husband left her, and he had, too, learned to read & write that he might write to her, she could read his letters, but no other writing. - Dr S talked in the most charming way of Bulwer's Novels, he prefers the Caxtons & My Novel to all his other books, and Ducroux, does not like Dickens, thinks his caracters distorted and exagerated, which spoils all the beauties, Thackery he has not read having begun his lectures, with the Yellow Plush Papers. - And could only get through 2 pages. I wish he would come again. The weather now is very charming, heard from John, he had not yet got his orders, was at Mobile when he wrote. -
We walk every afternoon and get on very comfortably. -
September 7th
News was brought yesterday that we had again gained a great Victory, at the old battle ground Manassas, and among those slain were Dr Smith's only son, and several other young men graduates of this College, excellent moral characters. What a loss to their families, and how these parents are bowed with trouble. Miss Clem Legg, sister of the young ladies who called on Elizabeth, was engaged to Mr Palmer, a very fine young man, one of the killed, and her sister Mary was in the train of an engagement with Mr Capers, also slain, and said to be a most charming person.
Mrs Walker who keeps a Hotel here went to Richmond, after the first of the battles, in that neighborhood, to bring home her son's body, said to be killed. She found him severely wounded and brought him home, he is now well except a stifened arm, she says she shall all her life consider this step, against the advice of her friends, an especial providence. - She visited one of the Hospitals, near Richmond, which contained 4 thousand patients, & said no one who did not witness the sufferings there could realize the horrors of the war.
A lady of Richmond daily accompanied by two servants brought, and administered herself, a quantity of fine, nutritious chicken soup. One young man had an old negro man who sat by him & fanned off the flies. She stopped and told him she hoped he would get well, he shook his head and said no, he could not he was too badly wounded, the servant remained with him until he died, and then after preparing his body for the grave, bundled up his things, put them on his head and went off home.
The Grave Yard where the Military burial takes place has two in each grave, numbered & marked so that they can be identified. She saw the Yankee Major Biddle there, he died of his wounds, and had the most vindictive feelings to the last, said it was a horrid war, and would never end.
There has been so much counterfeiting of Confederate Bank bills that all the 20, 50, & 100 bills have to be called in of the issue of 2 September '61. Mr Grimball has to go down to Charleston to change those that he has, he goes on Tuesday, not feeling very well. -
We heard from Mrs Butler, her grandchildren have been sent to California to their father and she says she is perfectly crushed and miserable poor dear soul how dreary life will be to her: she perfectly idolized her daughter. -
Papa called me down stayrs this morning to tell me about his affairs, he has some money or Confederate bonds in the Bank of Charleston and up here in the hands of Mr Judd 709 70¢ & in his press the bill & the money to pay the corn for Mr Kirkland. - His will & papers are in the hands of Mr Robertson. -
We hear from Mrs Irwin and others of the distress of Miss Legg. She seems broken hearted. She has been engaged 3 years to Mr Palmer, he is from the low Country, was handsome, well born, rich and cultivated. The 3 young men, Whiteford Smith Capers & Palmer were in the Spartan Rifles and shot by one ball & found lying close together. It would have been a comfort to this poor girl if she had been married to her love, and then she could have mourned with his family and had a claim on their sympathy. The success of our arms continues, we hope that this may lead on to peace. -
17 September
Martin came up and paid a short visit to his Mother looks as usual. Berkley writes to me the company has been so much reduced by detatchments that they have quite hard duty. A few evenings before he wrote, 3 negroes Henry Lowndes servant Lucas's servant and one of the teamsters had gone off to the Yankees which made them feel a little uneasy about their exposed situation. A night attack from the Gun Boats might annoy them very much.
Mr Grimball returned from the City having purchased some candles $1.25 per lb. horrid looking yellow bad smelling things. - Brought me some Yeast from the Bakers and I have commenced baking Rolls for breakfast. -
Papa got so very much bothered about the corn fearing he might be made to pay more than his share that I concluded it best to pay up at once for all that I was to use $1.37 per bushel although he bought some at $1.10 and the rest at $1.25 and paid $4 for the carting. I paid for two bushels already settled for and now we are free from accounts together and he seems better satisfied. Some weeks ago I changed 4 lbs. brown sugar for him for 4 lbs. best white, and he could not rest until it was weighed before his eyes which was done. My Papa has a very mean mind and is an extremely close man, he wonders at my buying peaches for the children and thinks it a great expense, he cannot eat them. He really lives here in the most comfortable way at the smallest expense. He talks now of going down to the low Country as soon as possible to see after his business and yesterday offered me the use of 3 rooms in his house. I would rather Charlotte should take charge of him in winter and hope I may not be obliged to live in his house. Now I have no home for our Plantation is broken up, our house in Town is only a hired one & upon the whole I may consider myself at home any where my family & trunks &c are. -
Mr Irwin paid us a visit yesterday & told us Mrs Kenedy's family were very anxious about Clem Legg. It seems there is a case of derangement in her family, a daughter who lives with them and is quite out of her right senses, it came about unexpectedly, and there is a risk of this young ladys being equally afflicted, she takes her trouble in such a silent, stunned way. -
Mr Grimball transacted his business very successfully he saw William & Lewis, this last moved from Church flatts to Sulivans Island. Dr Lining met Mr G in the street and spoke very well of Lewis' practise which I think was very kind as Drs do not like to praise one another. He said Lewis has lost very few cases. -
William was not very well. There had been a duel from the Fort, Alfred Rhett killed Ransom Calhoun a man he particularly hated, and as the thing was not represented to the Military Authorities there had as yet been no notice of it taken.
19 September
Yesterday was set apart by the Government as a day of Thanksgiving for our Victories. We went to the Methodist Church and heard a fair sermon by Mr Stacy and a very fine prayer from Whiteford Smith there was a collection taken up for the wounded soldiers I put in $4. -
Gov Wilkins passed through here yesterday and came to see us in the evening. He has been on a visit to his family in Greenville and looks badly. He was on his way down & stopped to see his Mother. - Gov travelled here in Stage from Greenville with an old lady in black she said she had lost her only son in one of the Battles and her daughter being very much attached to her brother died soon after him. Her son in law was in Service and she did not feel much interest in the war she had lost both her children and they could not be restored. The family distress is dreadful. -
30th September
There has not been a rising in Maryland as was expected and as far as rumor gives us information we have not gone on so gloriously as was expected, but only by hard fought battles kept our ground against our treacherous foe.
Miss Juliet Elliott invited Elizabeth to pass a day with her and take a ride to Glenns Springs she went yesterday. I am glad of a little diversion for her she has such hard work teaching Harry. -
Mr Irwin who is a perfect chronicle of parish events came to see us the other evening and told us that Mrs Wilson had left Mrs Tompson's with a half Month unpaid $47 that she talked very freely about people & would lead those she spoke to into the belief no one was of any account except her family, the Gibbes. I liked her very well her manners are easy but she comes of a family not considered truthful and on that account not much regarded. -
Dr Boyds wife a Miss Tompson Mrs I. says drank, and was subject to fits brought on by the use of stimulants he had a life of it with her. She died young and left 7 children inheritors of her habit, for I believe intemperance is inherited, - just as much as gout or scrofulous consumption.
We got our shoes from the Mute Rogers $ paid $4. 25 for each 1 pair for Ella & Lotty & 1 pair for myself. They look like strong well made shoes I have ordered a pair for Harry to be done in six weeks. This seems to be a district of a low character in Morals I do not hear of any one being more correct than another. Mrs I. says Mrs Legg who was a Miss Kenedy married a man much beneath her in family and it came about in this way. The Kenedys moved up here from Charleston for the health of Mr K and Miss L was pleased with this Mr Legg and engaged herself to him not knowing anything about him and after her marriage found he had very low relations. - Which shows the imprudence of marrying among strangers. -
10th October
We went to Church on Communion Sunday and saw Miss Clemy Legg in deep black what a pity the poor thing was not married to Mr Palmer. -
Papa talks of going down to his Plantation to settle his affairs. If he has to move his negroes he will send them to Georgia to Richard. I told him if he had no further need to be on his place that we should be very glad to have him stay with us and that I had enjoyed his being with us this Summer. He said he felt very grateful for all the kindness shewn him and would always remember it. - That it was pleasant to think of. -
Elizabeth had a nice little visit to Miss Juliet and rode to Glen Springs. When she returned she took cold and had a sore throat the Dr visited her and used costic for her throat with success. -
Mr Wilkins's man Edward went off. - Mrs & Miss Stone came to see us some time since, and when we returned the visit Miss Stone told Elizabeth the reason they visited us was they belonged to the way side Hospital, and a German of the 1st Infantry came up here on furlough for recruiting and spoke so much of Lewis's kindness to the men. He said he bought a wagon load of chickens and gave them to the sick soldiers, and when he went to Town to purchase medicine he paid for it himself, if he had not money enough allowed. -
Lewis has now changed to Fergusons Light Battery and I think he finds it rather dull. These way side Hospitals are very great Charities. The ladies of this place hire a large room & place beds in it as many as the space will allow and 2 ladies have charge each week send every day to the Rail Road and provide 3 meals. This war has brought out all over the land beautiful instances of true charity blessing and being blessed.
24th October
Papa has determined to go to his Plantation early in November, and I am quite reconciled to his going because he always moves at this season, and because it is now difficult to get what he likes to eat, if he cannot remain on his place he will return to us. We will have to remain up here, I suppose all Winter. The difficulty of getting supplies increases and now we shall be without Butter and soon I suppose the Cow will go dry.
We have a number of servants to feed and there seems a prospect of not getting corn. We wrote for Rice but it has not been sent as there is none in Town. Mr Grimball has given $50 to the Hospital in Richmond $100 to the relief of those who suffered by the fire in Charleston and all subscriptions brought to the house are responded to, $5 or $4 or $3. to the supplying clothes for the soldiers or a hospital. We have no income, and are in a fair way of getting to the end of what we have, in this state of things, he earnestly desires to subscribe to the free Market, to other demands upon the liberality of the public, but I tell him he has first to consider his own family. The papers have been filled with heart rending accounts of the needs of our soldiers in the field their shoeless, and bleeding feet their rags the cold nights, no blankets. Since the war began the efforts of private charity have been directed to the soldiers and we hear that in their rapid Marches they are forced to throw away their clothes blankets &c and how can they be supplied. The South Carolina troops are said to be the most destitute.
Heyward Manigault is going to his Plantation in that way he avoids Military duty his family are to remain in Greenville.
Berkley & Arthur have had second attacks of fever. W. is trying to get Arthur in the Signal Company. John writes from Mobile that the Naval Officers are greatly excited by the new plan of promoting for Meritorious conduct and not as in the old way according to rank. It is not thought this is rendering justice.
November 5th
Papa went off this morning with his man and his maid and I hope he will get down comfortably and be able to stay on his plantation. He went off feeling very sad and with heavy forebodings, but the times cause that. - The poor old gentleman we shall miss him very much, all his ridgid ways were sometimes very distressing. He disliked Harry and I can't wonder at that for he is a most disagreeable child, excitable and worrying and without feelings of proper respect for those older, a noisy & trying child. The stately and old time politeness which was kept up between Mr Grimball & Papa is not often seen now. Mr Grimball read history to him and he made remarks and the two looked like specimens of long forgotten breeding only to be met in books: he heard more books talked of by Mr G. than he ever heard in his life.
Berkley Wilkins came up here to bring his wife to stay with Mrs Faber her Aunt; B. took down a carpet we sent for the soldiers, and 2 blankets & $50. -
Arthur has moved to Town and sent up for his clothes and as I had no trunk they were put in a bag. He was quite in want of a trunk and some more clothes: poor child Mr Grimball went out this morning to try & get him some shoes & pants.
27 November
Mr Grimball returned from Camden with the box of silver which we now have up here and has gone to Charleston where he intends offering his services for Military duty in the Reserves, Captain Lesegne. He is under 65 & the Governor and Council have called out all men under 65 and of 16 to do Military duty. I have received 3 letters from him he was when last writing at the Bluff on a visit to Papa and the abandoned Plantation with the 13 old negroes left there. Our own soldiers are most destructive in their visits to houses left, and entered ours and helped themselves to what they liked. When this war does end the poor Planters on the Coast will be found in a miserable plight. Berkley offered Mr Grimball his stock to purchase a place to put the negroes on which he declined but it was very kind of B. He had just passed through another attack of fever. - A. & W. are at Fort Sumter, Lewis on Sulivan's Island. John writes to Ella from Mobile that he has some pleasant ladies to visit there, and that the Navy is held in great repute since Admiral Buchanan came there which state of things he is enjoying. -
The time & the war goes on and we hope in spite of every thing there will soon be a peace. At present not a ray of the quarter from which it will spring but the triumph of the Democratic party at the North, and the little success they have yet arrived at South: the Removal of McClellan is too in our favor. Burnside is represented as a man of Military education but urged on by the Abolition party at the North may be induced to hazard a battle which we think he will loose. The Lord is over all and in his hands we are, to destroy or to save. -
28 November
The weather cold thankful we are where we can get wood the price here is $2.50 for a cord. There is great difficulty in getting change, fortunately this morning I got a $20 bill changed, by purchasing $4 worth of Meal. -
Two poor women recently came here to beg. I was not able to give them meal, for I find it hard to get it for my own family, and had no change: but this morning when I was in the Village I passed one of them & gave her 25¢ having felt badly at refusing her all aid, when she applyed to me at the door. -
John has been made first Lieutenant which pleases him very much, no more pay but a better position. -
Elizabeth goes to dine with her Aunt every Saturday, to spend the day with Eliza, who is very much out of health. -
Miss Clemy Legg sent a message to Elizabeth requesting her to come and see her, yesterday afternoon Gabriella & herself went to return Miss Butler's visit, her Mother teaches at the District School, was a Miss Stone, is a widow, - and then went to see Miss Legg. -
Mrs Legg told the Wilkinses that her daughter found Elizabeth perfectly charming and enjoyed the Saturdays when they practised for Sunday. E. leads the choir. She really sings very well indeed - she has improved herself wonderfully. -
14 Dec.
Mr Grimball paid us a visit having a furlough from his company, he had a bad cold, and during his stay it was very cold he returned to Charleston and Military life. I think rather pleased with the fact that he, too, is doing what he can to help. -
Things get on here very much as usual. Just now Elizabeth has given a 2 weeks holiday to her School, grateful to herself, and very joyful to Harry. Miss Legg called to take Elizabeth for an excursion to the Iron Mills; Miss Palmer, the sister of the young man Clemy was engaged to, was with her on a visit, and her Grand Mother Kenedy's carriage, a most tumbled up concern, the drive was to the Rolling Mills. The iron of this district is very fine, and they saw the process of preparing the Iron, and brought home some specimens. The ride was a pleasant one, and as they carried a lunch, E. returned home very much pleased. - A little joy. - Miss Palmer is not in black, there is a large family & the father said he could not afford to put them all in mourning.
We have accounts of families wandering round from the threatened cities of Fredericksburg and Fort Royal in Virginia finding refuge in Cabins by the wayside. We have the comfort of a home and ought to be thankful. -
31 Decr
This is the last day of this year - the success of our Army at Fredricksburg and the account of the difficulties at the North give us evidence of an and to this dreadful strife: but the change comes so slowly, ones wishes are not realized. Patience will have its perfect work.
Elizabeth had a charming Christmas day, owing to the kindness of Miss Legg. She was invited to spend the day with Mrs Dawkins, at Union, where there is a very nice Episcopal Church, the only difficulty was the rising so early to go by the cars. E. was up in time, and came back in the evening, unexpectedly accompanied by her father, who got a furlough, and is now with us. E. had a charming day. Mrs D. is an energetic woman, and having no children her self, takes great interest in other peoples children. There was a plentiful breakfast on their arrival, and then the Christmas tree for the children, with little gifts made by kind hands. After the tree they practised the Church Music, then went to Church, where E. took her place in the Choir, they returned to Mrs D's, had a real Christmas dinner, and came home by the cars in the afternoon. We went to hear Mr Whiteford Smith preach in the morning, had a fine sermon, paid a visit to the W's, came home to a dinner of Roast pig and a pudding, which we all enjoyed. I have my Turkey for New Year's day. In the evening short cake, and a great deal of pleasant talk. - Just now we have some sausages, and I am glad Mr Grimball is with us to enjoy them.
1 January
This is New Years Day. I feel most thankful for all the unmerited mercies, we have had troubles, & losses, but how much worse they might have been. Through all this dreadful war we have as yet been spared, how long that may be, O! Lord thou knowest.
We have had a most plentiful day, for breakfast, buttered eggs, hot rolls, butter, & sausages, tea, white sugar. For dinner a Turkey, ham, soup, stewed Beef, rice, a Batter pudding, and sauce, for Tea short cake. -
We visited the Wilkinses, found them as usual, I sent her a present of some Beef, & 4 quarts of Peas this morning, - & Mrs Irwin a cup of sugar Loaf, some tea, a quarter of a lb, & some spices. She sent me a piece of butter.
The Porters to day had a sale of their furniture, and are going off tomorrow.morning they all came over to bid us farewell & we kissed, and had kind words of adieu. Mrs Atkinson, a lady from George Town the Mother of Mrs Porter, is a fine looking woman. She lost one of her sons in the 2d battle of Manassas. Old Mrs Porter is a very artistic old girl, and gives the impression of acting for effect. Mr Porter seems to have the affection of his congregation. - I hope we shall soon be able to move ourselves. - The nearest neighbor we have on our side of the College is a Mrs Owens whose husband drinks deplorably, & is the boldest deserter to be found. He ought to be in Columbia with the conscritps from here, walks up & down in his uniform, and waits to be arrested. Sometimes he is brought home in a cart, perfectly drunk, sometimes he crawls in on all fours, they have a farm, a horse, & until lately 2 negroes hired, he paid the wages so irregularly that they have been recalled. The wife has 5 little children, takes in work, is a Mantua maker, spins, weaves, dyes, clothes children, & husband, is pretty, young & cheerful looking, always well dressed, the farm has a bunch of sage, & 3 or 4 cabbages, to keep them well and fat, but she buys corn & Beef, and they look very well indeed, even the drunken husband. -
This morning the young men from the College rode about the Village, dressed up fantastically, one an old woman, one a lady in a riding dress, the rest in different ways, they came up here, Gabriella was very much amused with them.
Mrs H Stevens has returned, but is kept at home by a cold. Col. Clement Stevens has lost his wife, & 2 children from Dyptheria. Mrs Bee, the wife of our Gen who died on the first field of Manassas, has lost both her children of the same disease. This is Pendleton where these deaths took place. -
Berkley writes that his Christmas passed very pleasantly, they had a fine breakfast, of Opossum, Partridges, corn bread, & butter. A dinner with company. - In the Evening Theatricals a burlesque on the Ghost Scene in Hamlet. The dying scene of Lady Macbeth, and then a piece called the stolen pig, a man comes to the Captain of the Company complaining of having lost a pig, & says his negro, Cuffy, saw who took it. The Court Martial is arranged and the whole company called out, and Cuffy is made to point to the man who stole the pig. The part of the negro is played by Simons; and to the great delight of the negroes present, composed of teamsters, & servants there was music between the acts. Berkley lead the Orchestra, which consisted of 2 Violins, a triangle, bones, a drum. The end of the play is that the man is sentenced to death, and dies like Othello.
John has had a very tedious time with a boil on his leg, preventing his enjoying the dancing & ladies society he has found so pleasant in Mobile. -
Received a nice letter from Papa he writes in better spirits. -
This war has been the death of a great many old ladies, Mrs Pinckney, Mrs Hamilton,* We heard this evening that Mrs Wragg, the wife of Dr W. who had his house just completely fixed up, before the fire, and lost it, after passing through the summer in Pendleton, has been taken to Charleston in a confirmed melancholy. -
When the war is ended we will hear of many terrible private calamities that are now lost sight of in view of the great struggle going on. -
Old Miss Toomer, the Aunt of old Mrs Porter, has to be Mrs. Bowen added in pencil. left up here with Miss Charlotte Toomer, she is 82 & bed ridden. There are still vestages of great beauty, she shewed us her minature taken when 19, a very sweet picture. Is fond of society, and now dying of consumption. It seems in early life she was a gay heedless girl, and exposed herself to scandalous remarks on account of her free manners with a Col. Byrn, & so with all her gifts of beauty & sprightliness, hers has been a lost life. - She now tells her friends to pray that she may be taken away. The nature of her illness makes her room very disagreeable; poor old lady how sad a speticle. -
February 13
Mr Toomer Porter had a sale of his furniture & moved his family to Charleston. Mr Irwin the proprietor now lives in the other wing and keeps his school, to which Harry goes. -
Miss Toomer & Miss Charlotte, her niece, are boarding at Mrs Thomsons. Her health is better, we visited her the other day and she complained of the fare, very little Milk, very little butter, always salt meat and now & then one fowl for 12 people. Her friends in Charleston find the price of all articles of food very high, Beef $1 per lb. She talked very earnestly of the difficulty of trusting any one. Once when very ill, she thinking herself likely to die, had a paper drawn up, & signed it, giving nineteen thousand dollars to a relation, one she thought was her friend, she recovered, but the money was taken, and she is allowed 5 hundred dollars a year, which she finds very hard to get: What poor creatures we all are.
There has been a great success at Galveston Texas, the Harriet Lane taken, and the Town; and at Sabine pass. In Charleston the Iron Clad Gun-boats went out, and sunk one of the vessels blocading the harbour. A Gun boat was taken in Stono River by Col. Yates's command. The Gun boat expedition has not proved so signal a success. A vessel the Princess Royal was taken by the Blocading squadron and is a great loss to the Government. It is thought the Gun boats might have taken her. Arthur went to Stono as one of the Signal Corps and seems quite pleased with his prowis. -
Lieutenant Stevens lost his life in an engagement on the Mississippi River, his wife and Mother are bowed down with grief. -
The time slips away but the much desired peace is still very far off, a great deal of property is offered for sale and changes hands at very high prices negroes particularly.
Feby 20
Went over to see Mrs Irwin her husband used to keep the Mansion house in Greenville we met there. Mrs Lockwood the Miliner of the Village & Mrs Irwin sees every one in her bed chamber. Mrs Lockwood is a good looking woman and talked very sensibly of her business which just now consists in altering old straw hats into a fashionable shape, sewing them all over. She offered me some turnip greens out of her garden, which was quite civil, it seems Mrs Irwin very often sends to her for the turnip tops, and Mrs L. said the maid who came for them cut them off with a large piece of turnip, the heart she said, and when spoken to informed them Mr Irwin only eat them in that way and seemed quite indifferent to the wasteful procedure. Mrs Irwin laughed very much, and said she would attend to it, and they talked of sick soldiers &c, very pleasantly. Mrs L's husband came for her, walking in the chamber with out knocking. He is a Tailor, so we found ourselves in rather unusual company. In a Village there is no distinction all meet on an equality, and consequently the manners of these people are more refined; - or rather more alike than is usually found.
10th March
This is my wedding day and the first time we have not passed it together. Mr Grimball is now in Charleston to try and arrange his business he thinks he will be obliged to sell his negroes. The interest of his debt for the Plantations goes on & we are living on what little ready money we have & no income to be expected. Mr G. feels this proposed sale very much & I should not be surprised if he gave it up as he writes me word the price will only be 6 hundred round and there is no longer a hope of investing in 8 per cent Confederate bonds but the 7 per cent. I hope he may be directed in the right way I pray that he may, and however things turn out he has always acted as a high toned, honorable man, and that must be a great comfort. He troubles himself at having given notice with regard to his bonds, to the Morris's, so sensitive is his feeling of right. Yet he had the opinion of Mr Lesegne, one of our best Lawyers to guide him, & went by the laws of the Confederacy. -
Charles's wife has a little daughter, called after my Mother, which will make us all like her, she writes very pleasantly to Elizabeth.
Lewis has been quite sick with a bilious fever at the house in Town, Dr Giddings attending. Last Spring he had Typhoid fever, he passed the Summer at Church Flats, & the Fall among the Myrtles at Sulivans Island, both unhealthy places.
The Northern Congress has now made Lincoln Dictator, with full powers to call out the Militia, and make money. We have no hope but on our own exertions under Providence to look to. -
March 22
The successful running the blocade has given a great deal of wealth to some people and there is considerable activity in the selling negroes & City property. Mr Grimball has sold his negroes 48 to Mr G. Trenholm for eight hundred & twenty round some were old & some inferior & some very small children. They all went together & to a kind master which we are very thankful for. I wish he could sell the Plantations too and pay his debts & then get a little farm the desire of his heart. Property has been selling very well.
May 1
I have not written for some time. The war goes on with the same success on our side & the same pertinacity on the part of the Yankees. The last victory at Fredricksburg has been dearly bought by the loss of our hero Jackson, accidentally shot by his own men who would have died for him & since reported dead of Pneumonia and his wounds. Van Dorn said to be murdered by a Dr Peters.
The startling news has been going the rounds of the Village that this Rail Road is to be torn up to mend the main Roads. I don't know how we are to get away or hear of the outer world for the horses are all taken up by the Army and there will be no Stage or mail more than 1 or twice a week. Mr Grimball has gone to the City to meet John a telegram to him to do so, John ordered to sea. The successful repulse at Fort Sumter of the Iron Clads is a great triumph but they still talk of trying again. W. writes the whole world is speculating and includes parsons, Gens. I wish Mr Grimball could do a little success in that way for he needs it. -
Lewis had a difficulty with his Captain & left is now in charge of the pickets on Johns Island, - he has not yet got his permit to be examined for Surgeon, which is a disappointment to him.
The Rev. Mr Miles gave an address to the Graduating class Charleston College on God in History there are some lines which are his own very beautiful

“Fair faces beaming round the household hearth
Young joyous tones in Melody of Mirth
The sire doubly living in his boy,
And she, the Crown of all that wealth of joy;
These make the home like some sweet lyre given
To sound on earth, the harmonies of Heaven.
A sudden discord breaks the swelling strain,
One chord has snapped; the harmony again
Subdued & slower moves, but never more
Can pour the same glad music as of yore;
Less & less full the strains successive wake
Chord after chord must break - and break - and break
Until on earth the lyre dumb & riven
Finds all its chords restrung to loftier notes in heaven”.

Miss Stone brought the Miss Lucas's to see Elizabeth & Gabriella ladies from Charleston but new acquaintances. Mrs Davidson & her daughter Mrs Caps came yesterday afternoon. Mrs D. has bought a house up here & now finds her self heartily tired of the life here, the days so long so long. - The only way to get along is to earnestly pursue a daily routine, & hope for the best and enjoy all that comes in ones way & be thankful.
Mrs Wilkins and her daughters are going down and we are sorry for ourselves but glad on their account. Eliza's health is so miserable & she wishes to see Dr Geddings. -
June.
Berkley came up 10 days since for his furlough he looks well and is quiet and as he always has been. He leaves us on Tuesday 9th to return to his Artillery. I am not satisfied that he is in a healthy position but they give the men quinine. We have been very glad to see him.
Vicksburg holds out finely there has been a very destructive Raid on Combahee, Millions of property destroyed & carried off; 6 or 7 hundred negroes by 200 Armed negroes with white Officers.
We have now been up here a year and think of remaining until the fall, we have a nice little garden and some promising chickens. -
21st June
Arthur came up on the 10 & remained 10 days he had his clothes washed & mended & several little things done for him, we found him improved. Mr Grimball gave him 100 dollars to assist in paying his mess bill &c. It was a pleasant visit, we were glad to see him.
28th June
Received a letter from Papa in which he says Mr G. Lowndes & Mr Heyward have sold their Combahee places very well & advises Mr Grimball to sell his plantations he goes down on Friday the 3d to arrange matters if possible. -
The prices of articles of food are very high. Bacon $1.25 per lb Corn $3.50 per bushel & in Charleston cows sell for 3 hundred & 50 dollars. Mrs Wilkins writes she has one but did not buy it & sold her calf for $60 was told afterwards she ought to have got more her son Berkley paid $6 for a breast of veal.
Arnoldus Vanderhorst who is now Major on Whiting's staff was married to Miss Adele Allston with 10 groomsmen, and all things in the usual style, a fine supper & two receptions with cake and wine, in these war times quite appreciated.
John has been ordered to sea and ran the blocade with a party of officers in charge, 8, he was delighted & wrote to us from Bermuda that every roll of the Ocean seemed the welcome of a friend, he thinks he is to go to France. Charles also went out with a party & got to Nauso, after a boisterous voyage, and being shot at by the Yankees. -
August 4th
Vicksburg has fallen, Port Hudson followed of course, the Mississippi is in possession of our foe, Charleston is beseiged with a large force, Naval and land. Lees advance was not a success, he has returned after a direful battle at Gettysburg Pennsylvania, in which we lost 15 thousand & retreated. There have been riots in New York opposing the draft. And now we are to have a fast day on the 30th and in the mean time Charleston holds out. Lee is ready to fight, Johnston is some where in the West with his Army, and people generally feel very much depressed. This in the public state of affairs. -
In our private matters things are equally adverse. Papa has had all his negroes carried off in a recent raid on Pon Pon Heyward Manigault's too; Papa's house was sacked by his own negroes his Mill burnt and he lies ill at Adams Run. Charlotte is there attending him, and very much tried by her losses, & charge of Papa: he refuses to move. Mr Grimball is in Charleston and yesterday's letter from him fills us with distress, it gives the account of the death of his sister Mrs Wilkins a truly good woman, a deplorable loss to her daughters. She died on the 3d August of Dysentary after an illness of some days.
Charleston closely beseeged and Morris's Island partly in posession of the enemy is now considered the key to Charleston harbour & it is said there was culpable neglect all through the winter, when the Military, & belles, were dancing & flirting, balls lasting until day light, dancing the German waltze. It is said the officers from New Orleans expressed themselves struck with the fast style of the young ladies. At a Christmas party at Col. Fergusons, where a gay collection of young people were assembled, Miss Helen Singleton was dressed as a bride in Mrs Sam F's wedding dress, Captain Tom Ferguson acting as groom, and the bridesmaids all in order, with groomsmen to match. A Magistrate reading out the Episcopal Marriage service & the old Col. giving the bride away. This in the consideration of many people was a real wedding, and Col. F. is greatly to be blamed. In the biography of Miss Edgerton's father he is said at a gay party in Ireland to have jumped over a broomstick with one of the young ladies, and they were pronounced man & wife, her friends were very much incensed and had a divorce procured so that he was divorced before he was married. In this State divorce is not allowed. -
We are now in the midst of severe disasters and the losses so terrible Gen. Johnston Petigrew was shot retreating in the rear guard of Lees army into Virginia & died at Bunker Hill: the Lord's hand is laid heavily on us may we cry mightily unto him (& be heard); - as the simple Ninivites did in their threatened destruction. -
William & Arthur have been at Battery Wagner exposed to the fierce fire of the foe as yet unhurt. W. says the smell from the imperfectly buried Yankees is dreadful. Why did they not throw them to the sharks waiting outside, the water in the wells is tainted with their wretched carcases. -
Berkley is on Johns Island with a part of his Artillery Lewis at the out posts on Johns Island & Arthur on Johns Island eaten up by Muskeetoes & calling wildly for a net & a servant. -
9 Sep
Mr Grimball took his nieces to Camden and placed them comfortably in their lodgings he arrived here on Saturday and looked sad and worne by all the anxiety he has gone through. He feels the death of his sister very much she was a most gentle and Christian woman. -
There was a Confirmation here on the 30 August and Mr Grimball was confirmed, and took Communion. We thought the voice of the Bishop, when he put his hands on Mr Grimball, was most tender, in its tone. This is a most comfortable thing for me; ever since my marriage 32 years ago Mr Grimballs not being a member of the Church has been a trouble to me, & now that in spite of his prejudices, he has joined the Episcopal Church, I consider this the answer to my prayers. He now sets the best example to his sons & they who revere & love him will certainly follow. -
We have gone through a great deal of anxiety about the continuance of our residence here, the Place has been sold and for some time we thought by the 1 of January we might be entirely with out a home, but now for another year we are to continue here, tenants of Mr Irwin, at the same rate. The difficulty of living is very great, but Mr White is kind to us, and we get on. -
The papers to day state that Morris Island is Evacuated, although expecting this I felt shocked when it was a fact. - Arthur was there in Battery Wagner at the time. William until very lately was in Fort Sumter and on one occasion rubish fell on him & covered him up. William Mikel who was standing near thought him killed but he fortunately escaped unhurt. -
Papa continues very much in the same state. -
September 20
There has been a very brave & successful repulse of an attack on Fort Sumter. The Artillery have been moved from the Fort & an Infantry Company, the Charleston Batallion put there & Major Stephen Elliott placed in command it is said they took the flag that used to be on the Fort, & Major Anderson was permitted to take with them. -
Every thing is now tending to a battle in the West. - As there were no longer any guns to man in Fort Sumter the Artillery were placed in different batteries William's company are at Fort Ripley a warf in the middle of the harbour or rather near Fort Sumter, they have a boat to live in & find it very disagreeable. We saw yesterday the death of Mrs Alice Heyward, the war I expect has killed her. I have know her so long & always liked her that I feel very much shocked. -
Berkley has gone to Fort Johnston, with the Marions. Last night W. Carson came here to pay a visit he stays too long. - but it is civil his calling this is the 4th or 5th visit. -
Sep 29
Our success in the West is very gratifying, & much needed to keep up the drooping spirits. Every paper contains accounts of the donations to the Hospitals, & it is wonderful & affecting to see whar little things are sent, combs, tooth brushes, a banjo, a bunch of herbs, a roll of rag, every thing that any one can spare: or has. -
4th October
I received this morning from Charlotte the painful account of Papa's death, he suffered at last very much, and passed away on the morning of the 30th September 1863, between 5, & 6 in the morning, he was very much swollen had parozisms of difficulty of breathing which were terrible, had been twelve weeks in bed, had bed sores on his back & when the difficult breathing came on had to be held up in bed but through all that his faith never wavered, & he has gone to that rest & that joy he so longed for, he must have been 78 years of age: Charlotte throughout this painful illness has attended him, & comforted him, by her presence & care. - Lewis was fortunately there, ordered to take charge of some hospitals & was with Papa when he died. -
I shall miss him as long as I live for he loved me, and was always kind. - The prayer book I now use was a present from him, being a large one so that I need not use spectacles. His life was one of many changes. Belonging to one of the old families in New York he married early, my Mother of Hugenot descent. He was devoted to her, they had $40 thousand to begin with, and he went in debt for a Planting interest, was not very successful, became involved & passed nearly all his life an embarassed man with a large family. (4 years before the war he was more easy, & after the sale of part of the Northern property divided 30 thousand to each of his children) After 16 years my Mother was taken from him by a violent death, being crushed to death, the house falling in the storm on Sulivans Island, of 1822. After my Grandfathers death, he managed the property of his Mother, & gave great dissatisfaction to his brothers & sisters.
Some years before his Mothers death they induced her to take the charge from him, he married Miss Lowndes, 7 years after my Mothers death, who died leaving 2 children, 1 son, & 1 daughter, the son alone survives, on whom all her property settled.
The death of this lady was a great grief to him, she was very pious, and sensible. He had become very much interested in Religion just after my Mothers death, and through all the varied scenes of his long life his faith sustained him, & comforted him. - If the Country had not been torn apart by this revolution he would have left a very handsome property to his children, at least one hundred & fifty thousand dollars apiece: but his negroes, 2 hundred of them, have left him, & the Plantations are ruined: but in these times no one thinks of the losses, the war fills all the mind. -
Since we have been going to the Court House to Church there have been 3 Baptisms. The first was Miss Tompson, an adult, & there was on the table a huge Crockery petcher & Basin, with a towel thrown over it altogether a curious inelegant appearance, then Mrs Irwin's baby a nice healthy babe, for her there was a very small crockery bowl & Pitcher, & then Mrs Drayton Ford's baby a large French china bowl, gilt edged, and a fine damask napkin. Mrs Ford, Miss Lucas, Mr Ford, and the maid with the screeching baby standing in front, very elegant, in they own conceat. - Henrietta Gedding's babe was also christened, for her, a beautiful large silver bowl. -
Oct 21
William is now in Charleston at Battery Ramsy. He thinks we had better move the furniture in Charleston to the upper part of the City. -
Dec. 30
I have not written for a long time, & now before the New Year must write up. William paid us a visit which we all enjoyed, he had a bruised heel and was a great deal in the house he gave Harry lessons in Algebra and on X we had a noble Turkey which Mr Irwin let me have $5 the cost. We all dined heartily on it, and it lasted 4 days the last one making a very fine soup. -
I had some collars made for W. & he went off quite comfortably. Peggy who has been staying at the Irwin's in their wash room was informed they wanted the room so she came here in the wash room, and when the rain came & flooded the floor we moved her up stayrs, so it happened in the evening that W & H sat at the fire with their old Mauma W. smoking and the old Mauma smoking too: quite comfortably & having a cosy talk. She is a remarkable looking old woman and has been a faithful nurse to my children she must be now 82 or 3.
There is an afflicted family in the Village Mrs Butler, who teaches the district school has lost her son who was in the Tresury department receiving good pay engaged to be married to Miss Lucy Lucas who has some fortune, was in Wilmington at some public building transacting business the day was very cold and the high stone steps frozen, both hands filled with papers; he slipped on the first step and fell the whole way down knocking his head at every step & was taken up insensible and died in two hours. - The Mother has the pity of everyone for she is a mild lady like woman and has suffered much her husband left her constantly for Months at a time & the last 2 years of his life lived with a woman in Philadelphia as his wife. He came on a visit to Richmond and there killed himself by jumping out of a window. The son was conducting himself very well. The Lord have mercy on her.
Old Miss Stone an infirm old lady had her horse & carriage burnt up. The girls & Harry were at some tableau at the Court house & were very much alarmed at the glare of the fire thinking the Court house on fire: there is a quantity of powder stored there. -
1 January 1864
Mr Grimball was prevented from going to Town by the weather & I am glad he remained for we have always been together on New Year's day. We are expecting a visit from Lewis on his way to the Western Army. - I thank God for all his mercies and pray to increase in faith & love & charity. - The travelling now is attended with so much risk that I shall feel unhappy until Mr Grimball returns. -
The Kenedies have said the most complimentary things about William. Mrs K the day after the girls & W. took tea there, sent a message that she was sorry she had not been able to come in the room & make the acquaintance of Mr Grimball she heard he was such a fine young man. -
April 25th
Mr Grimball went down after his business and took a severe cold, returned & was ill, Dr Kenedy attending, he recovered very slowly. Berkley came up on sick furlough, boils on his leg, was with us 15 days, the Dr ordered generous diet, we did our best & he returned & is now better. Mr Grimball went at the same time to pay a visit to Mr Finley at Aiken, who wished him to stay with him a month, they met William coming up on sick furlough 30 days, an attack of Jaundice, while he was with us Lewis arrived from Dalton, a furlough of 20 days, we enjoyed their visits very much. There was a severe snow storm in March which destroyed the Peach Crop & injured the gardens. Mr Aiken wrote to Mr Grimball in answer to a letter from him proposing to stay with him a few days while in Charleston, saying he would always be glad to see him, that his furniture had been removed from Jehossee & placed at the Grove for safe Keeping. - Mr G. went to Aiken, hoping to locate himself there, but provisions are so high, property too, that he gave it up. - The winters here are so long & cold, but at this place we have had wood free of charge. The Council is to meet here on the 10 May, & John Elliott is invited to stay with us, we shall find it difficult to make him comfortable. In the matter of food things are so dear & so scarce. The tidings from New York conveyed in a letter from Nannie Morris to Charlotte of Mrs Zobrisky's death is a distress to all of us, she was so amiable & nice a person. Mrs Barnwell died of consumption in Sumter brought on by anxiety at being in Charleston during the impending attack, a dreadful loss to her children, Ann who had married Mr Nowel, died soon after her marriage. Mr Barnwell has been so taken up with running after the negroes that he has quite lost sight of the health of his family. -
The Juno a Government vessel was lost at sea, and it is supposed all on board. Phil Porcher commanded her, the pride & solace of his parents. Lewis writes word he is better, stationed at Resaca more comfortably than at the other Camp. We hear some times from John, he sent a box of things to us from England, got Charles to attend to them for him, who being ordered off to command the Florida left the commission to Mr Trapman who is living there & his wife. The box has arrived in Wilmington among the fortunate few not thrown out of the vessel, the Thistle, which got aground getting into Wilmington. Mr Kops has kindly seen about it for us, the duties are to be paid in Gold. Mr G. wrote to Mr Robertson to get him to advance the money, & he would pay it in July. - I hope we may get the box, for we really want the things, and John sent them, the dear, good child. The prices are very high Corn is $10 per bushel, Peas dito, butter $4 per lb, Beef $2 per lb, Pork dito.
The taxes are so high the old currency is cut off 1 third, so for us the times are very tight, until July there is hardly any money to live on. We fortunately have Corn to last during the summer. Mr Kirkland, the Methodist Preacher kindly helped us to get that $4 per bushel. We paid for 100 bushels of Corn in Barnwell & we got it up here at the depot from the Government supply they taking that quantity below. -
Mr Kirkland died about 4 weeks since of cold, got on his Circuit, a very good man, I feel that we have lost a friend.
Mrs Tompson had her house burned down a few days since in broad day & lost nearly every thing, her store of flour & Bacon & Corn & much furniture & clothing. She lived in this neighborhood, we had often seen her but she did not visit us, I am very sorry for her.
Anna Frost invited the girls to come out to them on Friday to an evening party in honor of their brother's wedding. He married Miss Walker of the Asylum, they are to stay until Sunday morning. - Gabriella & Elizabeth are going, these two are learning German & find it very hard.
This morning received a letter from Arnoldus Vanderhorst informing me he had sent our box to Columbia, we may then soon get it. -
May 15
Mr Grimball sent Adam to Columbia to bring the box to us. We have now opened it and find 2 pieces of beautiful long cloth, 18 yds white cambric, 2 doz spools of white cotton, 1 do black, 6 papers pins, a large supply of needles put up in a glass bottle, 1 piece linnen, 4 dresses, black poplin cloth for a suit for Mr Grimball 28 yds. white flannel, a hat for Mr G. shoes, high & thick soled & slippers 2 pair shoes for Harry, 1 pair for each of the girls, & 1 for me & 3 pair of slippers for the girls. The shoes are rather tight but very much needed, and we feel how kind and sensible this good child has been in his selections. I have sent 9 yds of long cloth, 3 yds. linnen, 3 yds. flannel, 2 papers pins, 2 spools cotton, 1 paper needles to the Wilkinses. John said he wished them sent sent something if we could spare it out of the box.
I gave each of the women servants a yd of long cloth to make an apron & 1 yd to Adam; to Mrs Irwin our land lady I gave a half paper small pins do large, 2 yds long cloth, 1 yd flannel for her baby.
This long cloth costs now $8 per yd if not more, flannel must be from $10 to 15, linnen $25 per yard. Shoes such as we have $75 a pair, spool cotton $2 for one. I am very thankful as John did send us these things they got to us safe, so many people lose their boxes. The Church has been Consecrated, & the Council has met here. John Elliott staid with us, a very pleasant visit, he is a pious & successful M. preacher in Anderson, where he has a Church. -
22 May
The Battles in Virginia are so far successful for us and Johnston in Georgia appears to be acting on the defence with skill, at least we hope so. He has given up some places, the Yankees file their papers with his, and we hope this Summer through the blessing of God, to arrive at a peace. The long Winter is at last over, and the Summer here. I think this a very pleasant Summer climate.
The shoos are all too narrow, Harry's entirely too small but we are stretching them, they are too nice to give up. -
Received a letter from John dated 31 March containing his Photograph. It is very nicely done, but looks thinner & older than when we last saw him. -
The Frosts party was quite a pleasant one, and the girls returned Saturday afternoon. E says the bride looked better teaching the mutes than now. There is a second rate air about the whole concern very striking comparing them with the Frosts. She paid the bride a visit on Saturday morning and said a little child playing on the floor looked very much like Mrs Henderson, her sister. Miss Mag Walker, the bride's sister, said “Yes, he does favour Mrs Henderson some”. -
July 30
Mr Grimball received a letter from William written from the 3d N.C. Hospital, Charlotte Street, Charleston, telling him he was there ill, & at the end of the letter said there was such a buzzing in his head from Quinine he could hardly write, he had received the stockings sent down, & had a pair on, was thankful for them. Arthur wrote the next day, & Berkley Wilkins, both saying William was very ill. Arthur sent a telegram begging his Papa to come down at once, Mr Grimball set off on Monday, arrived in Charleston about 5 o'clock on Tuesday 25. William knew him but when he spoke wandered. Arthur met his father at the cars, Berkley was at the Hospital. Mr Grimball passed the night there & at about 7 o'clock on Wednesday morning William passed away, apparently without pain, his father closing his eyes. He was placed in the Wilkin's vault, temporarily, on Thursday morning at 10 o'clock, Mr Gadsden performing the Service, having visited and prayed for William, on Tuesday afternoon before Mr G arrived, Ham was with him Dr Geddings attended, and he had a room to himself, and was as comfortable as possible.
It has pleased Almighty God to take from us this good, affectionate, and gifted child, just when the promise of his youth and care, he took with himself to train and prepare himself for his profession might have yeilded some fruit. He was handsome, elegant, & cultivated in his manners & so much interested in his family, the letters I have from him always allude to them, & propose some benefit for them. I believe him among the saved in Heaven: his fever was the consequence of the exposure on the Coast, while attending to his duties, he was 1st Lieutenant 1st S.C. Artilery. My God give me Resignation to thy will, and lift up my poor, sinful heart to trust, & to pray always. -
27 August
It is just a month since my dear William was taken from us & each day seems but to add to the sense of the berevement. God's will be done, and may he sanctify to us this dispensation. It will certainly wean our hearts from the world, for by him, & through him we expected to be honored here. - and he is in heaven; I have now two children in heaven, Harriet & William. - May my hard, worldly heart be lifted up from this vain passing life to that eternal & with those redeemed & in heaven. -
Arthur came up with his father looking thin and shattered, he spent his furlough satisfactorily, he was docile, every day he read two chapters in the Bible to me, a small one I got for him, & said a Hymn, “Just as I am”. I pasted the Hymn in the book for him, & hope he will read his Bible regularly. William was a great loss to him, he seemed like a wall of defence, always there to help & keep him up. His health seemed benefitted, but he smokes too much. He went down yesterday. -
Berkley got a furlough for a week & spent it with us, he looks well and is now to take Quinine regularly & may be in that way able to escape fever. - His father gave Arthur money to buy quinine. We have not heard from Lewis & are uneasy about him. There are notices of William in the papers commendatory of him, Charlotte writes me the notice from the Bar was very good, we have not seen it. Lasage Elliott sent Mr Grimball a paper drawn up at a meeting of some of his personal friends commending his character & talents, it was to have been published in the Guardian, we have not yet seen it. They also requested permission to place a tablet on his grave. - All this shews that his life, though short, was not without its use, his example may lead others to strive after good. -
Sep 3
Received letters from Lewis near Atlanta in the trenches. He was overwhelmed with distress at the death of his brother & says he has been confirmed & joined the Church. Bishop Ley is with the Army, Lewis has for some time been seriously impressed & then wavered before he joined the Church. This war has had a very chastening influence on the young men, and his brothers death no doubt assisted the feeling. I am truly thankful for the mercy.
Sep 2d
My mind is constantly dwelling on William's life, his earnest, serious manner when a very little child, we were all riding together & the other boys made so much noise that W. knelt down and said his prayers, which surprised them so much they became quiet. - One day he said to me “Ma don't die for if you die I will die too & then if you die I will go to Heaven to look for you.” He said his chatechism when he was going to college, to keep Arthur quiet. - When quite grown up he put Harry to bed for two months as H wished it. - Miss Smith said he had the most reverent manner in Church, I cannot think that with such a nature Religion being long “felt a comfort” as he wrote to me, was lightly understood. He must have taken it lovingly, into his soul. Mr Grimball often says he thinks he was not treated judiciously, & in that way met his death, but I try to think it was God's will to take him from us, & this passing world. - When his papers came up there was a letter from William to his father, the last he wrote, saying that might be the last of him, & if it was not for the expense he wished him to come & then said come, come, it almost broke Mr Grimball's heart, but he could not have got there sooner than he did, & then he just recognized him. - Oh my dear, dear child, how I think of you, and all your unselfish, thoughtful ways; I believe I was always kind to him, I know I meant to be. -
1 October
2 Months have passed since my dear William's death, and I feel that it was but yesterday. -
16 January 1865
We passed a sad Xmas, last year my dear William spent 10 days with us, & I felt all the time that those hours were before me, his affectionate greeting of us, the loving kind tones of his voice, his fine manly form, & expressive face, were ever in my mind, & I mourned for my lost son. - We had many mercies, we were well, & the family at home enjoyed a bountiful repast, on Xmas day and on New Years day. The winter has been a very cold one, but we have had a home & food. This day Elizabeth left us to be assistant teacher in Miss Read's School in Unionville. Miss Kenedy has been very kind in interesting herself about this plan of Elizabeth's, & went down with her to day, to see the school begin, E is to teach French & Music. - This dear child has been the comfort and help of her parents, and family, she has taught her sisters, & Harry, and benefitted them in every way. Lotty, owing to her care & instruction is well educated, & Harry has been most unwillingly instructed, in French, and in every way elevated, & improved. - She must be followed, wherever she goes, with a blessing; a dutiful, & Christian child. Miss Read is keeping house, & we hope E will find it pleasant there. -
The war goes on and things look gloomy but I have an abiding faith in the success of the Cause. -
Lewis is with Hood's Army, and we have not heard from him for 2 Months, John is in the Sea King, our new Privateer, & now I believe our only one as Second Lieutenant. - Arthur in Charleston in the Signal Service, and Berkley with his Marion Artillery on Johns Island, where he does in turn Picket duty. - Gabriella teaches 2 small children & gives Music lessons to one little girl which furnishes her with a little pocket money. -
There has been a terrible rain storm which greatly injured the Rail Roads we have not had mail for a week.
6th March 1865
I have no heart to write a journal now. The war goes on but so much distress and suffering. Charleston evacuated, Columbia sacked & burned, Cheraw, Winnsborough, Camden, Society Hill & other places visited by the Army of Sherman & sacked and burned. Our Army now under Johnston following Sherman and all things in gloom & trouble. Arthur & Berkley are with the troops from the Coast in Raleigh & Hillsborough. Lewis was with us for 10 days, looking quite well, he is now with the Army in North Carolina. Harry received an appointment from the Gov, for the Arsenal, & to day left us for Greenville where they are to be located. This has been a great trial to me for he is the youngest and not yet sixteen. I fear all the fatigue & hardship he will not be able to stand; and my heart yearns over this child. He left a very good school for this appointment and they have no books to educate the Cadets. - My only comfort is in prayer.
Gabriella & Charlotte have a nice little School of 7 scholars, there were 8 but one has left not being able to get board. - Gabriella teaches 3 girls Music she gets $35 per Month for the School & $20 for the Music. -
The mails are all broken up Couriers take letters round. Elizabeth is rich she came up to see Lewis. - This is near the end of September, and since May -
February 20th 1866.
I read over my journal this morning and determined to finish it by making a note of the events of the Summer just passed. In April Arthur came home from the Army in North Carolina being sent to a hospital in Raleigh, and there being no room for him in the over crowded building, he was allowed to proceed home, to recruit, having had a severe attack of fever. In June Berkley & Harry arrived, the war being over, both ArmysLees & Johnstons having surrendered, & the Southern States overwhelmed, & conquered.
The boys found us most happy to see them, but with an empty corn box, & no money, that could be so called; we sent about, & did as others, sold dresses and ornaments, and bought bacon, & corn, the servants continued with us & Patty who had lived with me for 36 years, and always behaved with the most examplary propriety, being a skillful seamstress, tailoress, Mantuamaker, & washer & ironer, proposed herself to work out; wash & iron for us & support her 2 children & herself, the children waiting on us. This she did faithfully until she left us the 10th January, being sent for by her son & Husband. When she could she sold articles for us, going at all times, & would take nothing for her trouble. She frequently brought me grist, Molasses, & flour, which she said was my share of what she made. The old Mauma has acted throughout with the most perfect consideration, she was terribly mortified by Elizabeth being a teacher, & Gabriella, & Charlotte keeping a little School. She said to the Kenedys, “You see dem going long so; but dey has plenty of gould and silver in de bank; and dey is such an old family. -”
When Patty came to take leave of me she said “My dear Mistress, My dear Mistress”, with a great appearance of feeling, & brought a little oven in her hand, a present to the young ladies, they had often borrowed it from her during the war to bake cakes in their room. I asked her if she could not take it with her, she said “Oh, yes mam, but I always termined to give it to the young ladies when I went away,” and then she sent them a little clothes horse to dry their muslins on. I am thankful amid the wreck of all to have this example of affection and duty to always remember. 3 days before she went one of the servants asked her if she was going to bake for her journey, no she said I am going to wash my mistresses clothes, & so she did leaving every thing clean, tubs &c.
The old Mauma is living at Mrs Hankels her own choice, she has behaved with uniform kindness. Always when she got any thing nice she brought it to Lotty or Ella and they took it from her & seemed to enjoy it coming out of her pocket, wrapped in a piece of clean cloth, or a scrap of brown paper. During the hardest part of the war she was living at Mrs Irwins, and as they kept a plentiful table, & fed her well for her services, she saved some of her dinner every day for Harry, & he with the apetite of a growing boy, scarcely satisfied, went every night to see her, & eat her present to him. -
Lewis came home from Johnston's Army, & Elizabeth had her long vacation of 3 Months, Lewis & Arthur gave us some anxiety from their dissipated tendencies. Harry returned to his School, at the College. Mr Carlise is an excellent teacher and we are most thankful he has this opportunity of getting a good education. Mrs Kenedys family were very hospitable, the boys and girls were frequently asked over there to spend the evening and Clementine & Mary established a Musical Club to meet every Tuesday evening at the house of the different members for the enjoyment of society, and the improvement of Music. This association was very pleasant and continued until the end of January. -
Lewis paid attention to Miss Clementina, and after a time was accepted, & is now married & settled at Frog Level, near Greenville, being the only Dr in the place & having the only Drug Store. - She is a very nice girl, educated & pleasant looking and mannered, a member of the Episcopal Church, so is Lewis, and now through Gods mercy he is a temperance man & I trust will succeed.
The wedding was a quiet morning affair, no bridesmaids, cake & wine, at the Grandmothers, and they set off early on Thursday morning for their future home, in a carriage, via Greenville, intended going the same day, 7th Feb 1866 but the coachman said it was a rainy day, & late, & he could only take them half way to a little way side inn. -
Lewis had $3000 to commence his married life on. I gave it to him, but as the property in New York was in the law courts, under the Confiscation act & could not be used until released Lewis Morris lent him this sum. - and he seems to be acting wisely & well with it. -
Mary Legge was married in October, quite a flourishing wedding and fixings, 9 bridesmaids & groomsmen. Col. Legge, the father of these young ladies, is a man of intemperate habits, and no morals, never pays any thing he owes, and does not regard his word. That such a person should occupy positions of trust, & honor in this place is a proof of the low state of morals. I am sorry Clementina was so sired, her Mother's family are very nice people. -
Mr Grimball went to Charleston with Lewis early in November. Arthur went down with 2 wagons in charge to Mr Wagner with articles of value & importance, and got $50 for his services which bought him some clothes. Berkley went by the cars. -
Mr Grimball has lately got possession of his Plantations but is very much worried by his debts on them, & the accumulation of interest. The Morris's refuse to take the places to liquidate the debt. - My Property in New York is by the laws of the State not amenable to the debts of my husband during my life, and I am permitted to make such disposition of it by deed, gift, or will, as I may see fit. -
Should I die intestate he might be held entitled to a life estate in the property, to which extent his creditors might claim. I have written to request Harry to write a will for me giving Mr Grimball a suitable portion of my property for his life, & giving it at his death to the children. The rest equally divided among the children, all sharing alike. -
My dear John has sent me a present of 2 hats, 1 a Jockey, the other a silk, fully trimmed, and 1 doz pair of stockings, 1 doz Pocket handkerchiefs, hoop, balmoral dress shawl, cuffs, collars, shawl, gloves. I am very much pleased at this, mark of his attachment. The two boxes, paper ones, came through Baltimore from a Miss Anna Wells to whom John is or was engaged to be married. They are in Charleston with Mr Grimball. -
The Wilkinses are living at their house Lamson Street Charleston. Mr Grimball hires a room from them for $15 per Month. Arthur has gone up Cooper River to keep a Store with Prioleau & Alston, for the negroes, he sent to Berkley for Calico of a blue ground, with sprawling red flowers on it, as best suited to the taste of the Customers. They are paid in Rice, & A. sees visions of great success before him. - The end of the war found the old aristocracy reduced to many straights to get on and applying for, & gladly taking, very inferior places. Henry Manigault and his wife are Steward & Matron of the Alms House in Charleston. Williams Middleton is renting out his rooms, James Heyward's wife & daughters & W. H. Heyward's are taking in sewing. Mrs Allston the Gov' widow, keeps a boarding school. The Miss Manigaults teach in Yorkville, - and all over the State people are making efforts to support themselves, and adorning their reduced circumstances by their elegance & education.
Elizabeth has engaged with Miss Read for another year, and in consequence of this I suppose we will stay here another Summer.
We have engaged a family of our own former slaves as our hired servants, a man Josey, his wife Amy & daughter Delia for $16 per Month. The man $10, the girl & woman $6, they do so far very well. -